Risk is part of every human endeavor.
From the moment we get up in the morning, drive or take public transportation to get to school or to work until we get back into our beds (and perhaps even afterwards), we are exposed to risks of different degrees.
What makes the study of risk fascinating is that while some of this risk bearing may not be completely voluntary, we seek out some risks on our own (speeding on the highways or gambling, for instance) and enjoy them.
While some of these risks may seem trivial, others make a significant difference in the way we live our lives.
On a loftier note, it can be argued that every major advance in human civilization, from the caveman’s invention of tools to gene therapy, has been made possible because someone was willing to take a risk and challenge the status quo.
In this chapter, we begin our exploration of risk by noting its presence through history and then look at how best to define what we mean by risk.

 We close the chapter by restating the main theme of this book, which is that financial theorists and practitioners have chosen to take too narrow a view of risk, in general, and risk management, in particular.
By equating risk management with risk hedging, they have underplayed the fact that the most successful firms in any industry get there not by avoiding risk but by actively seeking it out and exploiting it to their own advantage.

 For much of human history, risk and survival have gone hand in hand.
Prehistoric humans lived short and brutal lives, as the search for food and shelter exposed them to physical danger from preying animals and poor weather.1 Even as more established communities developed in Sumeria, Babylon and Greece, other risks (such as war and disease) continued to ravage humanity.
For much of early history, though, physical risk1 The average life span of prehistoric man was less than 30 years.
Even the ancient Greeks and Romans were considered aged by the time they turned 40.and material reward went hand in hand.
The risk-taking caveman ended up with food and the risk-averse one starved to death.

 The advent of shipping created a new forum for risk taking for the adventurous.
The Vikings embarked in superbly constructed ships from Scandinavia for Britain, Ireland and even across the Atlantic to the Americas in search of new lands to plunder – the risk-return trade off of their age.
The development of the shipping trades created fresh equations for risk and return, with the risk of ships sinking and being waylaid by pirates offset by the rewards from ships that made it back with cargo.
It also allowed for the separation of physical from economic risk as wealthy traders bet their money while the poor risked their lives on the ships.The spice trade that flourished as early as 350 BC, but expanded and became the

 basis for empires in the middle of the last millennium provides a good example.
Merchants in India would load boats with pepper and cinnamon and send them to Persia, Arabia and East Africa.
From there, the cargo was transferred to camels and taken across the continent to Venice and Genoa, and then on to the rest of Europe.
The Spanish and the Dutch, followed by the English, expanded the trade to the East Indies with an entirely seafaring route.
Traders in London, Lisbon and Amsterdam, with the backing of the crown, would invest in ships and supplies that would embark on the long journey.
The hazards on the route were manifold and it was not uncommon to lose half or more of the cargo (and those bearing the cargo) along the way, but the hefty prices that the spices commanded in their final destinations still made this a lucrative endeavor for both the owners of the ships and the sailors who survived.2 The spice trade was not unique.
Economic activities until the industrial age often exposed those involved in it to physical risk with economic rewards.
Thus, Spanish explorers set off for the New World,

 2A fascinating account of the spice trade is provided in “Nathaniel’s Nutmeg”, a book by Giles Milton where he follows Nathaniel Courthope, a British spice trader, through the wars between the Dutch East India Company and the British Crown for Run Island, a tiny Indonesian island where nutmeg grew freely.
He provides details of the dangers that awaited the sailors on ships from foul weather, disease, malnutrition and hostile natives as they made the long trip from Europe around the horn of Africa past southern Asia to the island.
The huge mark-up on the price of nutmeg (about 3,200 percent between Run Island and London) offered sufficient incentive to fight for the island.
An ironic postscript to the tale is that the British ultimately ceded Run Island to the Dutch in exchange for Manhattan.
See G.
Milton, 1999, Nathaniel’s Nutmeg, Farrar, Strous and Giroux, New York.
For more on spices and their place in history, see: Turner, J., 2004, Spice: The History of a Temptation, Alfred A.
Knopf, New York.

 recognizing that they ran a real risk of death and injury but also that they would be richly rewarded if they succeeded.
Young men from England set off for distant outposts of the empire in India and China, hoping to make their fortunes while exposing themselves to risk of death from disease and war.

 In the last couple of centuries, the advent of financial instruments and markets on the one hand and the growth of the leisure business on the other has allowed us to separate physical from economic risk.
A person who buys options on technology stocks can be exposed to significant economic risk without any potential for physical risk, whereas a person who spends the weekend bungee jumping is exposed to significant physical risk with no economic payoff.
While there remain significant physical risks in the universe, this book is about economic risks and their consequences.

 Given the ubiquity of risk in almost every human activity, it is surprising how little consensus there is about how to define risk.
The early discussion centered on the distinction between risk that could be quantified objectively and subjective risk.
In 1921, Frank Knight summarized the difference between risk and uncertainty thus3:"… Uncertainty must be taken in a sense radically distinct from the familiar notion of Risk, from which it has never been properly separated.
… The essential fact is that "risk" means in some cases a quantity susceptible of measurement, while at other times it is something distinctly not of this character; and there are far-reaching and crucial differences in the bearings of the phenomena depending on which of the two is really present and operating.
… It will appear that a measurable uncertainty, or "risk" proper, as we shall use the term, is so far different from an un-measurable one that it is not in effect an uncertainty at all."

 In short, Knight defined only quantifiable uncertainty to be risk and provided the example of two individuals drawing from an urn of red and black balls; the first individual is ignorant of the numbers of each color whereas the second individual is aware that there are three red balls for each black ball.
The second individual estimates (correctly) the probability of drawing a red ball to be 75% but the first operates under the misperception3 Knight, F.H., 1921, Risk, Uncertainty and Profit, New York Hart, Schaffner and Marx.that there is a 50% chance of drawing a red ball.
Knight argues that the second individual is exposed to risk but that the first suffers from ignorance.

 The emphasis on whether uncertainty is subjective or objective seems to us misplaced.
It is true that risk that is measurable is easier to insure but we do care about all uncertainty, whether measurable or not.
In a paper on defining risk, Holton (2004) argues that there are two ingredients that are needed for risk to exist.4 The first is uncertainty about the potential outcomes from an experiment and the other is that the outcomes have to matter in terms of providing utility.
He notes, for instance, that a person jumping out of an airplane without a parachute faces no risk since he is certain to die (no uncertainty) and that drawing balls out of an urn does not expose one to risk since one’s well being or wealth is unaffected by whether a red or a black ball is drawn.
Of course, attaching different monetary values to red and black balls would convert this activity to a risky one.Risk is incorporated into so many different disciplines from insurance to engineering to portfolio theory that it should come as no surprise that it is defined in different ways by each one.
It is worth looking at some of the distinctions:probability of an event occurring, that is viewed as undesirable, and an assessment of the expected harm from the event occurring.Risk = Probability of an accident * Consequence in lost money/deaths In contrast, risk in finance is defined in terms of variability of actual returns on an investment around an expected return, even when those returns represent positive outcomes.Building on the last distinction, we should consider broader definitions of risk that capture both the positive and negative outcomes.
The Chinese symbol for risk bestcaptures this duality:

 This Chinese symbol for risk is a combination of danger (crisis) and opportunity, representing the downside and the upside of risk.
This is the definition of risk that we will adhere to in this book because it captures perfectly both the essence of risk and the problems with focusing purely on risk reduction and hedging.
Any approach that focuses on minimizing risk exposure (or danger) will also reduce the potential for opportunity.

 While most of this book will be spent discussing why risk matters and how to incorporate it best into decisions, we will lay out two big themes that animate much of the discussion.
The first is the link between risk and reward that has motivated much of risk taking through history.
The other is the under mentioned link between risk and innovation, as new products and services have been developed to both hedge against and to exploit risk.

 The “no free lunch” mantra has a logical extension.
Those who desire large rewards have to be willing to expose themselves to considerable risk.
The link between risk and return is most visible when making investment choices; stocks are riskier than bonds, but generate higher returns over long periods.
It is less visible but just as important when making career choices; a job in sales and trading at an investment bankmay be more lucrative than a corporate finance job at a corporation but it does come with a greater likelihood that you will be laid off if you don’t produce results.

 Not surprisingly, therefore, the decisions on how much risk to take and what type of risks to take are critical to the success of a business.
A business that decides to protect itself against all risk is unlikely to generate much upside for its owners, but a business that exposes itself to the wrong types of risk may be even worse off, though, since it is more likely to be damaged than helped by the risk exposure.
In short, the essence of good management is making the right choices when it comes to dealing with different risks.

 The other aspect of risk that needs examination is the role that risk taking plays in creating innovation.
Over history, many of our most durable and valuable inventions have come from a desire to either remove risk or expose ourselves to it.
Consider again the example of the spice trade.
The risks at sea and from hostile forces created a need for more seaworthy crafts and powerful weapons, innovations designed to exploit risk.
At the same time, the first full-fledged examples of insurance and risk pooling showed up at about the same time in history.
While there were sporadic attempts at offering insurance in previous years, the first organized insurance business was founded in 1688 by merchants, ship owners and underwriters in Lloyd’s Coffee Shop in London in response to increased demands from ship owners for protection against risk.

 Over the last few decades, innovations have come to financial markets at a dizzying pace and we will consider the array of choices that individuals and businesses face later in this book.
Some of these innovations have been designed to help investors and businesses protect themselves against risk but many have been offered as ways of exploiting risk for higher returns.
In some cases, the same instruments (options and futures, for example) have played both risk hedging and risk exploiting roles, albeit to different audiences.Risk clearly does matter but what does managing risk involve? For too long, we have ceded the definition and terms of risk management to risk hedgers, who see the

 purpose of risk management as removing or reducing risk exposures.
In this section, we will lay the foundation for a much broader agenda for risk managers, where increasing exposures to some risk is an integral part of success.
In a later section in the book, we will consider the details, dangers and potential payoffs to this expanded risk management.

 There are risk management books, consultants and services aplenty but the definition of risk management used has tended to be cramped.
In fact, many risk management offerings are really risk reduction or hedging products, with little or no attention paid to exploiting risk.
In finance, especially, our definition of risk has been narrowed more and more over time to the point where we define risk statistically and think off it often as a negative when it comes to assessing value.There are several factors that have contributed to the narrow definition of risk

 management.
The first is that the bulk of risk management products are risk hedging products, be they insurance, derivatives or swaps.
Since these products generate substantial revenues for those offering them, it should come as no surprise that they become the centerpieces for the risk management story.
The second is that it is human nature to remember losses (the downside of risk) more than profits (the upside of risk); we are easy prey, especially after disasters, calamities and market meltdowns for purveyors of risk hedging products.
The third is the separation of management from ownership in most publicly traded firms creates a potential conflict of interest between what is good for the business (and its stockholders) and for the mangers.
Since it is the managers of firms and not to the owners of these firms who decide how much and how to hedge risk, it is possible that risks that owners would never want hedged in the first place will be hedged by managers.

 If the allure of risk is that it offers upside potential, risk management has to be more than risk hedging.
Businesses that are in a constant defensive crouch when it comes to risk are in no position to survey the landscape and find risks that they are suited to take.
In fact, the most successful businesses of our time from General Motors in the earlypart of the twentieth century to the Microsofts, Wal-Marts and Googles of today have all risen to the top by finding particular risks that they are better at exploiting than their competitors.

 This more complete view of risk management as encompassing both risk hedging at one end and strategic risk taking on the other is the central theme of this book.
In the chapters to come, we will consider all aspects of risk management and examine ways in which businesses and individual investors can pick and choose through the myriad of risks that they face, which risks they should ignore, which risks they should reduce or eliminate (by hedging) and which risks they should actively seek out and exploit.
In the process, we will look at the tools that have been developed in finance to evaluate risk and examine ways in which we can draw on other disciplines – corporate strategy and statistics, in particular – to make these tools more effective.

 Risk has been part of every day life for as long as we have been on this planet.
While much of the risk humans faced in prehistoric times was physical, the development of trade and financial markets has allowed for a separation of physical and economic risk.
Investors can risk their money without putting their lives in any danger.

 The definitions of risk range the spectrum, with some focusing primarily on the likelihood of bad events occurring to those that weight in the consequences of those events to those that look at both upside and downside potential.
In this book, we will use the last definition of risk.
Consequently, risk provides opportunities while exposing us to outcomes that we may not desire.
It is the coupling of risk and reward that lies at the core of the risk definition and the innovations that have been generated in response make risk central to the study of not just finance but to all of business.

 In the final part of the chapter, we set up the themes for this book.
We argue that risk has been treated far too narrowly in finance and in much of business, and that risk management has been equated for the most part with risk hedging.
Successful businesses need a more complete vision of risk management, where they consider not only how toprotect themselves against some risks but also which risks to exploit and how to exploit them.

 Do human beings seek out risk or avoid it? How does risk affect behavior and what are the consequences for business and investment decisions? The answers to these questions lie at the heart of any discussion about risk.
Individuals may be averse to risk but they are also attracted to it and different people respond differently to the same risk stimuli.

 In this chapter, we will begin by looking at the attraction that risk holds to human beings and how it affects behavior.
We will then consider what we mean by risk aversion and why it matters for risk management.
We will follow up and consider how best to measure risk aversion, looking at a range of techniques that have been developed in economics.
In the final section, we will consider the consequences of risk aversion for corporate finance, investments and valuation.

 In a world where people sky dive and bungee jump for pleasure, and gambling is a multi-billion dollar business, it is clear that human beings collectively are sometimes attracted to risk and that some are more susceptible to its attraction than others.
While psychoanalysts at the beginning of the twentieth century considered risk-taking behavior to be a disease, the fact that it is so widespread suggests that it is part of human nature to be attracted to risk, even when there is no rational payoff to being exposed to risk.
The seeds, it coud be argued, may have been planted in our hunter-gatherer days when survival mandated taking risks and there were no “play it safe” options.

 At the same time, though, there is evidence that human beings try to avoid risk in both physical and financial pursuits.
The same person who puts his life at risk climbing mountains may refuse to drive a car without his seat belt on or to invest in stocks, because he considers them to be too risky.
As we will see in the next chapter, some people are risk takers on small bets but become more risk averse on bets with larger economic consequences, and risk-taking behavior can change as people age, becomewealthier and have families.
In general, understanding what risk is and how we deal with it is the first step to effectively managing that risk.

 While we can talk intuitively about risk and how human beings react to it, economists have used utility functions to capture how we react to at least economic risk.
Individuals, they argue, make choices to maximize not wealth but expected utility.
We can disagree with some of the assumptions underlying this view of risk, but it is as good a staring point as any for the analysis of risk.
In this section, we will begin by presenting the origins of expected utility theory in a famous experiment and then consider possible special cases and issues that arise out of the theory.The St.
Petersburg Paradox and Expected Utility: The Bernoulli Contribution

 Consider a simple experiment.
I will flip a coin once and will pay you a dollar if the coin came up tails on the first flip; the experiment will stop if it came up heads.
If you win the dollar on the first flip, though, you will be offered a second flip where you could double your winnings if the coin came up tails again.
The game will thus continue, with the prize doubling at each stage, until you come up heads.
How much would you be willing to pay to partake in this gamble?

 This is the experiment that Nicholas Bernoulli proposed almost three hundred years ago, and he did so for a reason.
This gamble, called the St.
Petersburg Paradox, has an expected value of infinity but most of us would pay only a few dollars to play this game.
It was to resolve this paradox that his cousin, Daniel Bernoulli, proposed the following distinction between price and utility:1“… the value of an item must not be based upon its price, but rather on the utility it yields.
The price of the item is dependent only on the thing itself and is equal for everyone; the utility, however, is dependent on the particular circumstances ofthe person making the estimate.”1 Bernoulli, D., 1738, Exposition of a New Theory on the Measurement of Risk.
Translated into English in Econometrica, January 1954.
Daniel came from a family of distinguished mathematicians and his uncle, Jakob, was one of the leading thinkers in early probability theory.

 Bernoulli had two insights that continue to animate how we think about risk today.
First, he noted that the value attached to this gamble would vary across individuals, with some individuals willing to pay more than others, with the difference a function of their risk aversion.
His second was that the utility from gaining an additional dollar would decrease with wealth; he argued that “one thousand ducats is more significant to a pauper than to a rich man though both gain the same amount”.
He was making an argument that the marginal utility of wealth decreases as wealth increases, a view that is at the core of most conventional economic theory today.
Technically, diminishing marginal utility implies that utility increases as wealth increases and at a declining rate.2 Another way of presenting this notion is to graph total utility against wealth; Figure 2.1 presents the utility function for an investor who follows Bernoulli’s dictums, and contrasts it with utility functions for investors who do not.2 In more technical terms, the first derivative of utility to wealth is positive while the second derivative is negative.

 a gain of $ 1.
Thus, the foundations for risk aversion are laid since a rational human being with these characteristics will then reject a fair wager (a 50% chance of a gain of $ 100 and a 50% chance of a loss of $100) because she will be worse off in terms of utility.
Daniel Bernoulli’s conclusion, based upon his particular views on the relationship between utility and wealth, is that an individual would pay only about $ 2 to partake in the experiment proposed in the St.
Petersburg paradox.3

 While the argument for diminishing marginal utility seems eminently reasonable, it is possible that utility could increase in lock step with wealth (constant marginal utility) for some investors or even increase at an increasing rate (increasing marginal utility) for others.
The classic risk lover, used to illustrate bromides about the evils of gambling and speculation, would fall into the latter category.
The relationship between utility and wealth lies at the heart of whether we should manage risk, and if so, how.
After all, in a world of risk neutral individuals, there would be little demand for insurance, in particular, and risk hedging, in general.
It is precisely because investors are risk averse that they care about risk, and the choices they make will reflect their risk aversion.
Simplistic though it may seem in hindsight, Bernoulli’s experiment was the opening salvo in the scientific analysis of risk.Mathematics meets Economics: Von Neumann and Morgenstern

 In the bets presented by Bernoulli and others, success and failure were equally likely though the outcomes varied, a reasonable assumption for a coin flip but not one that applies generally across all gambles.
While Bernoulli’s insight was critical to linking utility to wealth, Von Neumann and Morgenstern shifted the discussion of utility from outcomes to probabilities.4 Rather than think in terms of what it would take an individual to partake a specific gamble, they presented the individual with multiple gambles or lotteries with the intention of making him choose between them.
They argued that the expected utility to individuals from a lottery can be specified in terms of both outcomes and the probabilities of those outcomes, and that individuals pick

 3 Bernoulli proposed the log utility function, where U(W) = ln(W).
As we will see later in this chapter, this is but one in a number of utility functions that exhibit diminishing marginal utility.
4 Von Neumann, J.
and O.
Morgenstern (1944) Theory of Games and Economic Behavior.
1953 edition, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.one gamble over another based upon maximizing expected utility.

 The Von-Neumann-Morgenstern arguments for utility are based upon what they called the basic axioms of choice.
The first of these axioms, titled comparability or completeness, requires that the alternative gambles or choices be comparable and that individuals be able to specify their preferences for each one.
The second, termed transitivity, requires that if an individual prefers A to B and B to C, she has to prefer A to C.
The third, referred to as the independence axiom specifies that the outcomes in each lottery or gamble are independent of each other.
This is perhaps the most important and the most controversial of the choice axioms.
Essentially, we are assuming that the preference between two lotteries will be unaffected, if they are combined in the same way with a third lottery.
In other words, if we prefer lottery A to lottery B, we are assuming that combining both lotteries with a third lottery C will not alter our preferences.
The fourth axiom, measurability, requires that the probability of different outcomes within each gamble be measurable with a probability.
Finally, the ranking axiom, presupposes that if an individual ranks outcomes B and C between A and D, the probabilities that would yield gambles on which he would indifferent (between B and A&D and C and A&D) have to be consistent with the rankings.
What these axioms allowed Von Neumann and Morgenstern to do was to derive expected utility functions for gambles that were linear functions of the probabilities of the expected utility of the individual outcomes.
In short, the expected utility of a gamble with outcomes of $ 10 and $ 100 with equal probabilities can be written as follows:E(U) = 0.5 U(10) + 0.5 U(100)

 Extending this approach, we can estimate the expected utility of any gamble, as long as we can specify the potential outcomes and the probabilities of each one.
As we will see later in this chapter, it is disagreements about the appropriateness of these axioms that have animated the discussion of risk aversion for the last few decades.The importance of what Von Neumann and Morgenstern did in advancing our understanding and analysis of risk cannot be under estimated.
By extending the discussion from whether an individual should accept a gamble or not to how he or she

 should choose between different gambles, they laid the foundations for modern portfolio theory and risk management.
After all, investors have to choose between risky asset classes (stocks versus real estate) and assets within each risk class (Google versus Coca Cola) and the Von Neumann-Morgenstern approach allows for such choices.
In the context of risk management, the expected utility proposition has allowed us to not only develop a theory of how individuals and businesses should deal with risk, but also to follow up by measuring the payoff to risk management.
When we use betas to estimate expected returns for stocks or Value at Risk (VAR) to measure risk exposure, we are working with extensions of Von Neumann-Morgenstern’s original propositions.The Gambling Exception?

 Gambling, whether on long shots on the horse track or card tables at the casinos, cannot be easily reconciled with a world of risk averse individuals, such as those described by Bernoulli.
Put another way, if the St.
Petersburg Paradox can be explained by individuals being risk averse, those same individuals create another paradox when they go out and bet on horses at the track or play at the card table since they are giving up certain amounts of money for gambles with expected values that are lower in value.
Economists have tried to explain away gambling behavior with a variety of stories.

 The first argument is that it is a subset of strange human beings who gamble and that that they cannot be considered rational.
This small risk-loving group, it is argued, will only become smaller over time, as they are parted from their money.
While the story allows us to separate ourselves from this unexplainable behavior, it clearly loses its resonance when the vast majority of individuals indulge in gambling, as the evidence suggests that they do, at least sometimes.

 The second argument is that an individual may be risk averse over some segments of wealth, become risk loving over other and revert back to being risk averse again.
Friedman and Savage, for instance, argued that individuals can be risk-loving and risk- averse at the same time, over different choices and for different segments of wealth: In effect, it is not irrational for an individual to buy insurance against certain types of risk on

 any given day and to go to the race track on the same day.5 They were positing that we are all capable of behaving irrationally (at least relative to the risk averse view of the world) when presented with risky choices under some scenarios.
Why we would go through bouts of such pronounced risk loving behavior over some segments of wealth, while being risk averse at others, is not addressed.

 The third argument is that gambling cannot be compared to other wealth seeking behavior because individuals enjoy gambling for its own sake and that they are willing to accept the loss in wealth for the excitement that comes from rolling the dice.
Here again, we have to give pause.
Why would individuals not feel the same excitement when buying stock in a risky company or bonds in a distressed firm? If they do, should the utility of a risky investment always be written as a function of both the wealth change it creates and the excitement quotient?

 The final and most plausible argument is grounded in behavioral quirks that seem to be systematic.
To provide one example, individuals seem to routinely over estimate their own skills and the probabilities of success when playing risky games.
As a consequence, gambles with negative expected values can be perceived (wrongly) to have positive expected value.
Thus, gambling is less a manifestation of risk loving than it is of over confidence.
We will return to this topic in more detail later in this chapter and the next one.

 While much of the discussion about this topic has been restricted to individuals gambling at casinos and race tracks, it clearly has relevance to risk management.
When a trader at a hedge fund puts the fund’s money at risk in an investment where the potential payoffs clearly do not justify the price paid, he is gambling, as is a firm that invests money into an emerging market project with sub-par cash flows.
Rather than going through intellectual contortions trying to explain such phenomena in rational terms, we should accept the reality that such behavior is neither new nor unexpected in a world where some individuals, for whatever reason, are pre-disposed to risk seeking.5 Friedman, M.
and L.P.
Savage (1948) "The Utility Analysis of Choices involving Risk", Journal of Political Economy, Vol.
56, p.279-304.
They developed a utility function that was concave (risk averse) for some segments of wealth and convex (risk loving) over others.Small versus Large Gambles

 Assume that you are offered a choice between getting $ 10 with certainty or a gamble, where you will make $21 with 50% probability and nothing the rest of the time; the expected value of the gamble is $10.50.
Which one would you pick? Now assume that you are offered the choice between getting $10,000 with certainty or a gamble, where you will make $21,000 with 50% probability and nothing the rest of the time; the expected value of the gamble is $10,500.
With conventional expected utility theory, where investors are risk averse and the utility function is concave, the answer is clear.
If you would reject the first gamble, you should reject the second one as well.

 In a famous paper on the topic, Paul Samuelson offered one of his colleagues on the economics department at MIT a coin flip where he would win $ 200 if he guessed right and lose $ 100 if he did not.6 The colleague refused but said he would be willing to accept the bet if he was allowed one hundred flips with exactly the same pay offs.
Samuelson argued that rejecting the individual bet while accepting the aggregated bet was inconsistent with expected utility theory and that the error probably occurred because his colleague had mistakenly assumed that the variance of a repeated series of bets was lower than the variance of one bet.

 In a series of papers, Rabin challenged this view of the world.
He showed that an individual who showed even mild risk aversion on small bets would need to be offered huge amounts of money with larger bets, if one concave utility function (relating utility to wealth) covered all ranges of his wealth.
For example, an individual who would reject a 50:50 chance of making $ 11 or losing $10 would require a 50% chance of winning $20,242 to compensate for a 50% chance of losing $ 100 and would become infinitely risk averse with larger losses.
The conclusion he drew was that individuals have to be close to risk neutral with small gambles for the risk aversion that we observe with larger gambles to be even feasible, which would imply that there are different expected utility functions for different segments of wealth rather than one utility function for all wealth levels.
His view is consistent with the behavioral view of utility in prospect theory, which we will touch upon later in this chapter and return to in the next one.6 Samuelson, P.
1963.
“Risk and Uncertainty: A Fallacy of Large Numbers.” Scientia.
98, pp.
108-13.

 There are important implications for risk management.
If individuals are less risk averse with small risks as opposed to large risks, whether they hedge risks or not and the tools they use to manage those risks should depend upon the consequences.
Large companies may choose not to hedge risks that smaller companies protect themselves against, and the same business may hedge against risks with large potential impact while letting smaller risks pass through to their investors.
It may also follow that there can be no unified theory of risk management, since how we deal with risk will depend upon how large we perceive the impact of the risk to be.

 If we accept Bernoulli’s proposition that it is utility that matters and not wealth per se, and we add the reality that no two human beings are alike, it follows that risk aversion can vary widely across individuals.
Measuring risk aversion in specific terms becomes the first step in analyzing and dealing with risk in both portfolio and business contexts.
In this section, we examine different ways of measuring risk aversion, starting with the widely used but still effective technique of offering gambles and observing what people choose to do and then moving on to more complex measures.

 As we noted earlier, a risk-neutral individual will be willing to accept a fair bet.
In other words, she will be willing to pay $ 20 for a 20% chance of winning $ 100 and a 80% chance of making nothing.
The flip side of this statement is that if we can observe what someone is willing to pay for this bet (or any other where the expected value can be computed), we can draw inferences about their views on risk.
A risk-averse individual, for instance, would pay less than $ 20 for this bet, and the amount paid will vary inversely with risk aversion.

 In technical terms, the price that an individual is willing to pay for a bet where there is uncertainty and an expected value is called the certainty equivalent value.
We can relate certainty equivalents back to utility functions.
Assume that you as an individual are offered a choice between two risky outcomes, A and B, and that you can estimate theexpected value across the two outcomes, based upon the probabilities, p and (1-p), of each occurring:V = p A + (1-p) B

 Furthermore, assume that you know how much utility you will derive from each of these outcomes and label them U(A) and U(B).
If you are risk neutral, you will in effect derive the same utility from obtaining V with certainty as you would if you were offered the risky outcomes with an expected value of V:For a risk neutral individual: U(V) = p U(A) + (1-p) U(B)A risk averse individual, though, would derive much greater utility from the guaranteed outcome than from the gamble:For risk averse individual: U(V) > p U(A) + (1-p) U(B)In fact, there will be some smaller guaranteed amount ( ), which is labeled the certainty equivalent, that will provide the same utility as the uncertain gamble:) = p U(A) + (1-p) U(B)The difference between the expected value of the gamble and the certainty equivalent is termed the risk premium:Risk Premium = V -

 As the risk aversion of an individual increases, the risk premium demanded for any given risky gamble will also increase.
With risk neutral individuals, the risk premium will be zero, since the utility they derive from the expected value of an uncertain gamble will be identical to the utility from receiving the same amount with certainty.

 If this is too abstract, consider a very simple example of an individual with a log utility function.
Assume that you offer this individual a gamble where he can win $ 10 or $100, with 50% probability attached to each outcome.
The expected value of this gamble can be written as follows:Expected Value = .50($10) + .50($100) = $ 55The utility that this individual will gain from receiving the expected value with certainty is:U(Expected Value) = ln($ 55) = 4.0073 unitsHowever, the utility from the gamble will be much lower, sin ce the individual is risk averse:U(Gamble) = 0.5 ln($10) + 0.5 ln ($100) = 0.5(2.3026) +0.5(4.6051) = 3.4538 unitsThe certainty equivalent with therefore be the guaranteed value that will deliver the same utility as the gamble:U(Certainty Equivalent) = ln(X) = 3.4538 unitsSolving for X, we get a certainty equivalent of $31.62.7 The risk premium, in this specific case is the difference between the expected value of the uncertain gamble and the certainty equivalent of the gamble:

 Risk Premium = Expected value – Certainty Equivalent = $55 – $31.62 = $ 23.38 Using different utility functions will deliver different values for the certainty equivalent.
Put another way, this individual should be indifferent between receiving $31.62 with certainty and a gamble where he will receive $ 10 or $ 100 with equal probability.

 Certainty equivalents not only provide us with an intuitive way of thinking about risk, but they are also effective devices for extracting information from individuals about their risk aversion.
As we will see in the next chapter, many experiments in risk aversion have been based upon making subjects choose between risky gambles and guaranteed outcomes, and using the choices to measure how their risk aversion.
From a risk management perspective, it can be argued that most risk hedging products such as insurance and derivatives offer their users a certain cost (the insurance premium, the price of the derivative) in exchange for an uncertain cost (the expected cost of a natural disaster or movement in exchange rates) and that a significant subset of investors choose the certain equivalent.

 While observing certainty equivalents gives us a window into an individual’s views on risk, economists want more precision in risk measures to develop models for dealing with risk.
Risk aversion coefficients represent natural extensions of the utility function introduced earlier in the chapter.
If we can specify the relationship between utility and wealth in a function, the risk aversion coefficient measures how much utility7 To estimate the certainty equivalent, we compute exp(3.4538) = 31.62

 we gain (or lose) as we add (or subtract) from our wealth.
The first derivative of the utility function (dU/dW or U’) should provide a measure of this, but it will be specific to an individual and cannot be easily compared across individuals with different utility functions.
To get around this problem, Pratt and Arrow proposed that we look at the second derivative of the utility function, which measures how the change in utility (as wealth changes) itself changes as a function of wealth level, and divide it by the first derivative to arrive at a risk aversion coefficient.8 This number will be positive for risk- averse investors and increase with the degree of risk aversion.Arrow-Pratt Absolute Risk Aversion = - U’’(W)/U’(W)The advantage of this formulation is that it can be compared across different individuals with different utility functions to draw conclusions about differences in risk aversion across people.

 We can also draw a distinction between how we react to absolute changes in wealth (an extra $ 100, for instance) and proportional changes in wealth (a 1% increase in wealth), with the former measuring absolute risk aversion and the latter measuring relative risk aversion.
Decreasing absolute risk aversion implies that the amount of wealth that we are willing to put at risk increases as wealth increases, whereas decreasing relative risk aversion indicates that the proportion of wealth that we are willing to put at risk increases as wealth increases.
With constant absolute risk aversion, the amount of wealth that we expose to risk remains constant as wealth increases, whereas the proportion of wealth remains unchanged with constant relative risk aversion.
Finally, we stand willing to risk smaller and smaller amounts of wealth, as we get wealthier, with increasing absolute risk aversion, and decreasing proportions of wealth with increasing relative risk aversion.
In terms of the Arrow-Pratt measure, the relative risk aversionmeasure can be written as follows:Arrow-Pratt Relative Risk Aversion = - W U’’(W)/U’(W)W = Level of wealth8 Pratt, J.W., 1964, Risk Aversion in the Small and the Large, Econometric, v32, pg 122-136; Arrow, K., 1965, Aspects of the Theory of Risk-Bearing.
Helsinki: Yrjö Hahnsson Foundation.U’(W) = First derivative of utility to wealth, measuring how utility changes as wealth changeswealth changesU’’(W) = Second derivative of utility to wealth, measuring how the change in utility itself changes as wealth changesThe concept can be illustrated using the log utility function.U=ln(W)U’ = 1/WU’’ =1/W2Absolute Risk Aversion Coefficient = U’’/U’ =WRelative Risk Aversion Coefficient = 1

 The log utility function therefore exhibits decreasing absolute risk aversion – individuals will invest larger dollar amounts in risky assets as they get wealthier – and constant relative risk aversion – individuals will invest the same percentage of their wealth in risky assets as they get wealthier.
Most models of risk and return in practice are built on specific assumptions about absolute and relative risk aversion, and whether they stay constant, increase or decrease as wealth increases.
Consequently, it behooves the users of these models to be at least aware of the underlying assumptions about risk aversion in individual utility functions.
The appendix to this chapter provides a short introduction to the most commonly used utility functions in practice.

 There is one final point that needs to be made in the context of estimating risk aversion coefficients.
The Arrow-Pratt measures of risk aversion measure changes in utility for small changes in wealth and are thus local risk aversion measures rather than global risk aversion measures.
Critics take issue with these risk aversion measures on twogrounds:when individuals have to pick between two risky choices and provides two examples.
In his first example, when two investors – one less risk averse (in the Arrow-Pratt sense) than the other – are presented with a choice between two risky assets, the less risk averse investor may actually invest less (rather than more) in the more risky asset than the more risk averse investor.
In his second example, more risk averse individuals (again in the Arrow-Pratt sense) may pay less for partial insurance against a given risk than less risk averse individuals.
The intuition he offers is simple: the Arrow-Pratt measures are too weak to be able to make comparisons across investors with different utility functions, when no risk free option alternative exists.
Ross argues for a stronger version of the risk aversion coefficient that takes into account global differences.9

 There is little debate about the proposition that measuring risk aversion is important for how we think about and manage risk but there remain two questions in putting the proposition into practice.
The first is whether we can reliably estimate risk aversion coefficients when most individuals are unclear about the exact form and parameters of their utility functions, relative to wealth.
The second is that whether the risk aversion coefficients, even if observable over some segment of wealth, can be generalized to cover all risky choices.

 All of the assessments of risk aversion that we have referenced hitherto in this chapter have been built around the proposition that it is expected utility that matters and that we can derive risk aversion measures by looking at utility functions.
In the last few decades, there have been some attempts by researchers, who have been unconvinced by conventional utility theory or have been under whelmed by the empirical support for it, to come up with alternative ways of explaining risk aversion.9 Ross, S.A., 1981, Some Stronger Measures of Risk Aversion in the Small and in the Large with Applications, Econometrica, Vol.
49 (3), p.621-39.The Allais ParadoxThe trigger for much of the questioning of the von Neumann-Morgenstern expected utility theory was the paradox exposited by the French economist, Maurice Allais, in two pairs of lottery choices.10 In the first pair, he presented individuals with two lotteries – P1 and P2, with the following outcomes:P1: $ 100 with certaintyP2: $0 with 1% chance, $100 with 89% chance, $500 with 10% chance Most individuals, given a choice, picked P1 over P2, which is consistent with risk aversion.
In the second pair, Allais offered these same individuals two other lotteries – Q1and Q2 with the following outcomes and probabilities:Q1: $0 with 89% chance and $100 with 11% chanceQ2: $0 with 90% chance and $500 with 10% chance

 Mathematically, it can be shown that an individual who picks P1 over P2 should pick Q1 over Q2 as well.
In reality, Allais noted that most individuals switched, picking Q2 over Q1.
To explain this paradox, he took issue with the Von Neumann-Morgenstern computation of expected utility of a gamble as the probability weighted average of the utilities of the individual outcomes.
His argument was that the expected utility on a gamble should reflect not just the utility of the outcomes and the probabilities of the outcomes occurring, but also the differences in utilities obtained from the outcomes.
In the example above, Q2 is preferred simply because the variance across the utilities in the two outcomes is so high.

 In a closely related second phenomenon, Allais also noted what he called the common ratio effect.
Given a choice between a 25% probability of making $ 8,000 and a 20% probability of making $ 10,000, Allais noted that most individuals chose the latter, in direct contradiction of the dictums of expected utility theory.11 Both of the propositions presented by Allais suggest that the independence axiom on which expected utility theory is built may be flawed.

 10 Allais, M.
1979, The So-Called Allais Paradox and Rational Decisions under Uncertainty", in Allais and Hagen, Expected Utility Hypotheses and the Allais Paradox.
Dordrecht: D.
Reidel.
11 The two gambles have the same expected value of $ 2000, but the second gamble is more risky than the first one.
Any risk averse individual who obeys the dictums of expected utility theory would pick the first gamble.

 By pointing out that individuals often behaved in ways that were not consistent with the predictions of conventional theory, Allais posed a challenge to those who continued to stay with the conventional models to try to explain the discordant behavior.
The responses to his paradox have not only helped advance our understanding of risk considerably, but pointed out the limitations of conventional expected utility theory.
If as Allais noted, individuals collectively behave in ways that are not consistent with rationality, at least as defined by conventional expected utility theory, we should be cautious about using both the risk measurement devices that come out of this theory and the risk management implications.Expected Utility Responses

 The first responses to the Allais paradox were within the confines of the expected utility paradigm.
What these responses shared in common was that they worked with von Neuman-Morgenstern axioms of choice and attempted to modify one or more of them to explain the paradox.
In one noted example, Machina proposed that the independence axiom be abandoned and that stochastic dominance be used to derive what he termed “local expected utility” functions.12 In intuitive terms, he assumed that individuals become more risk averse as the prospects become better, which has consequences for how we choose between risky gambles.13 There is a whole family of models that are consistent with this reasoning and fall under the category of weighted utility functions, where different consequences are weighted differently (as opposed to the identical weighting given in standard expected utility models).

 Loomes and Sugden relaxed the transitivity axiom in the conventional expected utility framework to develop what they called regret theory.14 At its heart is the premise that individuals compare the outcomes they obtain within a given gamble and are disappointed when the outcome diverges unfavorably from what they might have had.

 12 Machina, Mark J.
1982.
“‘Expected Utility’ Theory without the Independence Axiom,” Econometrica, 50, pp.
277–323.
Stochastic dominance implies that when you compare two gambles, you do at least as well or better under every possible scenario in one of the gambles as compared to the other.
13 At the risk of straying too far from the topic at hand, indifference curves in the Von-Neumann- Morgenstern world are upward sloping and parallel to each other and well behaved.
In the Machina’s modification, they fan out and create the observed Allais anomalies.
14 Loomes, Graham and Robert Sugden.
1982.
“Regret Theory: An Alternative Theory of Rational ChoiceThus, large differences between what you get from a chosen action and what you could have received from an alternate action give rise to disproportionately large regrets.
The net effect is that you can observe actions that are inconsistent with conventional expected utility theory.

 There are other models that are in the same vein, insofar as they largely stay within the confines of conventional expected utility theory and attempt to explain phenomena such as the Allais paradox with as little perturbation to the conventional axioms as possible.
The problem, though, is that these models are not always internally consistent and while they explain some of the existing paradoxes and anomalies, they create new paradoxes that they cannot explain.

 While many economists stayed within the conventional confines of rationality and attempted to tweak models to make them conform more closely to reality, Kahneman and Tversky posed a more frontal challenge to expected utility theory.15 As psychologists, they brought a very different sensibility to the argument and based their theory (which they called prospect theory) on some well observed deviations from rationality including the following:a.
Framing: Decisions often seem to be affected by how choices are framed, rather than the choices themselves.
Thus, if we buy more of a product when it is sold at 20% off a list price of $2.50 than when it sold for a list price of $2.00, we are susceptible to framing.
An individual may accept the same gamble he had rejected earlier, if the gamble is framed differently.b.
Nonlinear preferences: If an individual prefers A to B, B to C, and then C to A, he or she is violating one of the key axioms of standard preference theory (transitivity).
In the real world, there is evidence that this type of behavior is not uncommon.c.
Risk aversion and risk seeking: Individuals often simultaneously exhibit risk aversion in some of their actions while seeking out risk in others.d.
Source: The mechanism through which information is delivered may matter, even if the product or service is identical.
For instance, people will pay more for a good, based upon how it is packaged, than for an identical good, even though they plan to discard the packaging instantly after the purchase.e.
Loss Aversion: Individuals seem to fell more pain from losses than from equivalent gains.
They note that individuals will often be willing to accept a gamble with uncertainty and an expected loss than a guaranteed loss of the same amount, in clear violation of basic risk aversion tenets.

 Kahneman and Tversky replaced the utility function, which defines utility as a function of wealth, with a value function, with value defined as deviations from a reference point that allows for different functions for gains and losses.
In keeping with observed loss aversion, for instance, the value function for losses was much steeper (and convex) than the value function for gains (and concave).Figure 2.2: A Loss Aversion Function15 Kahneman, D.
and A.
Tversky, 1979, Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk, Econometrica, v47, 263-292.a loss.
Stated in terms of risk aversion coefficients, they assumed that risk aversion coefficients behave very differently for upside than downside risk.

 Kahneman and Tversky also offered an explanation for the Allais paradox in what they termed the common consequence effect.
Their argument was that preferences could be affected by what they termed the consolation price effect, where the possibility of a large outcome can make individuals much more risk averse.
This can be seen with the Allais paradox, where the expected utilities of the four lotteries can be written as follows:E(u; P1) = 0.1u($100) + 0.89u($100) + 0.01u($100)E(u; P2) = 0.1u($500) + 0.89u($100) + 0.01u($0)E(u; Q1) = 0.1u($100) + 0.01u($100) + 0.89u($0)E(u; Q2) = 0.1u($500) + 0.01u($0) + 0.89u($ 0)

 Note that the common prize between the first pair of choices (P1 and P2) is 0.89 u($100), which is much larger than the common prize between the second pair of choices (Q1 and Q2) which is 0.89 u($0).
With the higher common prize first pair, the individual is more risk averse than he is with the much lower common prize second pair.

 If the earlier work by economists trying to explain observed anomalies (such as the Allais paradox) was evolutionary, Kahneman and Tversky’s work was revolutionary since it suggested that the problem with expected utility theory was not with one axiom or another but with its view of human behavior.
The influence of Kahneman and Tversky on the way we view investments, in general, and risk specifically has been profound.
The entire field of behavioral finance that attempts to explain the so-called anomalies in investor behavior has its roots in their work.
It is also entirely possible that the anomalies that we find in risk management where some risks that we expect to see hedged do not get hedged and other risks that should not be hedged do, may be attributable to quirks in human behavior.Now that we have described how we think about risk and measuring risk aversion, we should turn our attention to why it is of such consequence.
In this section, we will focus on how risk and our attitudes towards it affect everything that we do as humanbeings, but with particular emphasis on economic choices from where we invest our money to how we value assets and run businesses.Our views of risk have consequences for how and where we invest.
In fact, the risk aversion of an investor affects every aspect of portfolio design from allocating across different asset classes to selecting assets within each asset class to performance evaluation.cash.16price in terms of less than complete diversification.16 Cash includes savings accounts and money market accounts, where the interest rates are guaranteed and there is no or close to no risk of losing principal.The bottom line is that individuals are unique and their risk preferences will largely govern the right portfolios for them.Just as risk affects how we make portfolio decisions as investors, it also affects decisions that we make when running businesses.
In fact, if we categorize corporate financial decisions into investment, financing and dividend decisions, the risk aversion of decision makers feeds into each of these decisions:

 While these are questions that every business, private and public, large and small, has to answer, an additional layer of complexity is added when the decision makers are not the owners of the business, which is all too often the case with publicly traded firms.
In these firms, the managers who make investment, financing and dividend decisions have very different perspectives on risk and reward than the owners of the business.
Later in this book, we will return to this conflict and argue that it may explain why so many riskmanagement products, which are peddled to the managers and not to the owners, are directed towards hedging risk and not exploiting it.

 In both portfolio management and corporate finance, the value of a business underlies decision-making.
With portfolio management, we try to find companies that trade at below their “fair” value, whereas in corporate finance, we try to make decisions that increase firm value.
The value of any asset or collection of assets (which is what a business is) ultimately will be determined by the expected cash flows that we expect to generate and the discount rate we apply to these cash flows.
In conventional valuation, risk matters primarily because it determines the discount rate, with riskier cash flows being discounted at higher rates.

 We will argue that this is far too narrow a view of risk and that risk affects everything that a firm does, from cash flows to growth rates to discount rates.
A rich valuation model will allow for this interplay between how a firm deals with risk and its value, thus giving us a tool for evaluating the effects of all aspects of risk management.
It is the first step in more comprehensive risk management.

 As human beings, we have decidedly mixed feelings about risk and its consequences.
On the one hand, we actively seek it out in some of our pursuits, sometimes with no rewards, and on the other, we manifest a dislike for it when we are forced to make choices.
It is this duality of risk that makes it so challenging.

 In this chapter, we considered the basic tools that economists have devised for dealing with risk.
We began with Bernoulli’s distinction between price and utility and how the utility of a wager will be person-specific.
The same wager may be rejected by one person as unfair and embraced by another as a bargain, because of their different utility functions.
We then expanded on this concept by introducing the notion of certainty equivalents (where we looked at the guaranteed alternative to a risky outcome) and risk aversion coefficients (which can be compared across individuals).
While economists have long based their analysis of risk on the assumptions of rationality and diminishingmarginal utility, we also presented the alternative theories based upon the assumptions that individuals often behave in ways that are not consistent with the conventional definition of rationality.

 In the final part of this chapter, we examined why measuring and understanding risk is so critical to us.
Every decision that we are called upon to make will be colored by our views on risk and how we perceive it.
Understanding risk and how it affects decision makers is a prerequisite of success in portfolio management and corporate finance.Appendix: Utility Functions and Risk Aversion Coefficients

 In the chapter, we estimated the absolute and relative risk aversion coefficients for the log utility function, made famous by Bernoulli’s use of it to explain the St.
Petersburg paradox.
In fact, the log utility function is not the only one that generates decreasing absolute risk aversion and constant relative risk aversion.
A power utility function, which can be written as follows, also has the same characteristics.U(W) = WaAbsolute risk aversion =Relative risk aversion =Figure 2A.1 graphs out the log utility and power utility functions for an individual:Figure 2A.1: Log Utility and Power Utility FunctionsThere are other widely used functions that generate other combinations of absolute and relative risk aversion.
Consider, for instance, the exponential utility function, which takes the following form:U(W) = a- exp-bWAbsolute risk aversion =Relative risk aversion =This function generates constant absolute risk aversion (where individuals invest the same dollar amount in risky assets as they get wealthier) and increasing relative risk aversion (where a smaller percentage of wealth is invested in risky assets as wealth increases).
Figure 2A.2 graphs out an exponential utility function:The quadratic utility function has the very attractive property of linking the utility of wealth to only two parameters – the expected level of wealth and the standard deviation in that value.U(W) = a+ bW – c W2Absolute risk aversion =Relative risk aversion =The function yields increasing absolute risk aversion, where investors invest less of their dollar wealth in risky assets as they get wealthier, a counter intuitive result.
Figure 2A.3graphs out a quadratic utility function:Having described functions with constant and increasing relative risk aversion, consider a final example of a utility function that takes the following form:Absolute risk aversion =Relative risk aversion =This function generates decreasing relative risk aversion, where the proportion of wealth invested in risky assets increases as wealth increases.The functions described in this appendix all belong to a class of utility functions called Hyperbolic Absolute Risk Aversion or HARA functions.
What these utility functions share in common is that the inverse of the risk aversion measure (also called risk tolerance) is a linear function of wealth.

 While utility functions have been mined by economists to derive elegant and powerful models, there are niggling details about them that should give us pause.
The first is that no single utility function seems to fit aggregate human behavior very well.
The second is that the utility functions that are easiest to work with, such as the quadratic

 utility functions, yield profoundly counter intuitive predictions about how humans will react to risk.
The third is that there are such wide differences across individuals when it comes to risk aversion that finding a utility function to fit the representative investor or individual seems like an exercise in futility.
Notwithstanding these limitations, a working knowledge of the basics of utility theory is a prerequisite for sensible risk management.

 In chapter 2, we presented the ways in which economists go about measuring risk aversion and the consequences for investment and business decisions.
In this chapter, we pull together the evidence that has accumulated on how individuals perceive risk, by first looking at experimental and survey studies that have focused on risk aversion in the population, and then turn our attention to what we can learn about risk aversion by looking at how risky assets are priced.
Finally, the explosion of game shows that require contestants to make choices between monetary prizes has also given rise to some research on the area.

 In the process of looking at the evidence on risk aversion, we examine some of the quirks that have been observed in how human beings react to risk, a topic we introduced in chapter 2 in the context of prospect theory.
Much of this work falls under the rubric of behavioral finance but there are serious economic consequences and they may be the basis for some well known and hard to explain market anomalies.

 Before we look at the empirical evidence that has accumulated on how we react to risk, we should summarize what the theory posits about risk aversion in human beings.
Most economic theory has been built on the propositions that individuals are risk averse and rational.
The notion of diminishing marginal utility, introduced by Bernoulli, still lies at the heart of much of economic discussion.
While we may accept the arguments of these economists on faith, the reality is much more complex.
As Kahneman and Tversky noted in their alternative view of the world, there are systematic anomalies in human behavior that are incompatible with rationality.
We can act as if these aberrations are not widespread and will disappear, but the dangers of doing so are significant.
We will both misprice and mismanage risk, if we do not understand how humans really perceive risk.In this chapter, we will turn away from theoretical measures of risk aversion and arguments for rationality and look at the empirical evidence on risk aversion.
In the process, we can determine for ourselves how much of the conventional economic view ofrisk can be salvaged and whether the “behavioral” view of risk should replace it or supplement it in analysis.

 In chapter 2, we presented the Arrow-Pratt measure of risk aversion, an elegant formulation that requires only two inputs – the first and the second derivatives of the utility function (relative to wealth, income or consumption) of an individual.
The fatal flaw in using it to measure risk aversion is that it requires to specify the utility function for wealth, a very difficult exercise.
As a consequence, economists have struggled with how to give form to these unobservable utility functions and have come up with three general approaches – experimental studies, where they offer individuals simple gambles, and observe how they react to changes in control variables, surveys of investors and consumers that seek to flesh out perspectives on risk, and observations of market prices for risky assets, which offer a window into the price that investors charge for risk.

 Bernoulli’s prospective gamble with coin flips, which we used to introduce utility theory in the last chapter, can be considered to be the first significant experimental study, though there were others that undoubtedly preceded it.
However, experimental economics as an area is of relatively recent origin and has developed primarily in the last few decades.
In experimental economics, we bring the laboratory tools of the physical sciences to economics.
By designing simple experiments with subjects in controlled settings, we can vary one or more variables and record the effects on behavior, thus avoiding the common problems of full-fledged empirical studies, where there are too many other factors that need to be controlled.Experimental Design

 In a treatise of experimental economics, Roth presents two ways in which an economic experiment can be designed and run.
In the first, which he calls the method of planned experimental design, investigators run trials with a fixed set of conditions, and the design specifies which conditions will be varied under what settings.
The results of

 the trials are used to fill in the cells of the experimental design, and then analyzed to test hypotheses.
This is generally the standard when testing in physical science and can be illustrated using a simple example of a test for a new drug to treat arthritis.
The subjects are divided randomly into two groups, with one group being given the new drug and the other a placebo.
The differences between the two groups are noted and attributed to the drug; breaking down into sub-groups based upon age may allow researchers to draw extended conclusions about whether the drug is more effective with older or younger patients.
Once the experiment is designed, the experimenter is allowed little discretion on judgment and the results from all trials usually are reported.
In the second, which he calls the method of independent trials, each trial is viewed as a separate experiment and the researcher reports the aggregate or average results across multiple trials.1 Here, there is more potential for discretion and misuse since researchers determine which trials to report and in what form, a choice that may be affected by prior biases brought into the analyses.
Most experiments in economics fall into this category, and are thus susceptibleto its weaknesses.

 As experimental economics has developed as a discipline, more and more of conventional economic theory has been put to the test with experiments and the experiments have become more complex and sophisticated.
While we have learned much about human behavior from these experiments, questions have also arisen about how the proper design of and reporting on experiments.
We can learn from how the physical sciences, where experiments have a much longer tradition, have dealt with a number of issues relating to experiments:1 Roth, A.E.
1994, Let's Keep the Con Out of Experimental Econ: A Methodological Note, Empirical Economics (Special Issue on Experimental Economics), 1994, 19, 279-289.methods in the physical sciences try to shield the data from the subjective judgments of researchers (by using double blind trials, for example).tendency will be to recalibrate the experiment until the theory is proved correct.

 As we draw more and more on the findings in experimental economics, we should also bring a healthy dose of skepticism to the discussion.
As with all empirical work, we have to make our own judgments on which researchers we trust more and how much we want to read into their findings.Experimental FindingsExperimental studies on risk aversion have spanned the spectrum from testing whether human beings are risk averse, and if so, how much, to differences in risk aversion across different subgroups categorized by sex, age and income.
The findings from these studies can be categorized as follows:I.
Extent of Risk Aversion

 Bernoulli’s finding that most subjects would pay relatively small amounts to partake in a lottery with an infinite expected value gave rise to expected utility theory and laid the basis for how we measure risk aversion in economics.
As a bookend, the experiments by Allais in the 1950s, also referenced in the last chapter, provided evidence that conventional expected utility theory did not stand up to experimentation and that humans behaved in far more complicated ways than the theory would predict.

 In the decades since, there have several studies of risk aversion using experiments.
Some of these experiments used animals.
One study used rats as subjects and made them choose between a safe alternative (a constant food source) and a risky one (a variable food source).
It concluded that rats were risk averse in their choices, anddisplayed mildly decreasing risk aversion as their consumption increased.2 In a depressing after-thought for risk averse human beings, another study concluded that more risk averse rats lived shorter, more stressful lives than their less risk-averse counterparts.3

 Studies with human subjects have generally concluded that they are risk averse, though there are differences in risk aversion, depending upon how much is at stake and how an experiment is structured.
Levy made his subjects, with varying levels of wealth, pick between guaranteed and risky investments.
He found evidence of decreasing absolute risk aversion among his subjects – they were willing to risk more in dollar terms as they became wealthier- and no evidence of increasing relative risk aversion – the proportion of wealth that they were willing to put at risk did not decrease as wealth increased.4The experimental research also finds interesting differences in risk aversion when

 subjects are presented with small gambles as opposed to large.
Many of these studies offer their subjects choices between two lotteries with the same expected value but different spreads.
For instance, subjects will be asked to pick between lottery A (which offers 50% probabilities of winning $ 50 or $ 100) and lottery B (with 50% probabilities of winning $ 25 or $125).
Binswanger presented these choices to 330 farmers in rural India and concluded that there was mild risk aversion with two-thirds of the subjects picking less risky lottery A over the more risky lottery B (with the rest of the respondents being risk lovers who picked the more risky lottery) when the payoffs were small.
As the payoffs increased, risk aversion increased and risk loving behavior almost entirely disappeared.5 Holt and Laury expanded on this experiment by looking for the cross over point between the safer and the riskier lottery.
In other words, using lottery A and B as examples again, they framed the question for subjects as: What probability of success would you need on lottery B for it to be preferable to lottery A? Risk averse subjects should require a probability greater than 50%, with higher probabilities reflecting higher

 2 Battalio, Raymond C., Kagel, John H., and MacDonald, Don N.(1985), "Animals' Choices Over Uncertain Outcomes: Some Initial Experimental Results", American Economic Review, Vol.
75, No.
4.
3 Cavigelli and McClintock 4 Levy, Hiam (1994) “Absolute and Relative Risk Aversion: An Experimental Study,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 8:3 (May), 289-307.
5 Binswanger, Hans P.(1981),"Attitudes Towards Risk: Theoretical Implications of an Experiment in Rural India", The Economic Journal, Vol.
91, No.
364.

 risk aversion They also found that risk aversion increased as the payoffs increased.6 Kachmeimeir and Shehata ran their experiments in China, eliciting certainty equivalent values from subjects for lotteries that they were presented with.
Thus, subjects were asked how much they would accept as a guaranteed alternative to a lottery; the lower this certainty equivalent, relative to the expected value, the greater the risk aversion.
They also varied the probabilities on different lotteries, with some having 50% probabilities of success and others only 10% probabilities.
Consistent with the other studies, they found that risk aversion increased with the magnitude of the payoffs, but they also found that risk aversion decreased with high win probabilities.
In other words, subjects were willing to accept a smaller certainty equivalent for a lottery with a 90% chance of making $ 10 and a 10% chance of making $110 (Expected value = .9(10) + .1 (110) = 20) than for a lottery with a 50% chance of making $ 10 and a 50% chance of making $ 30 (Expected

 In summary, there seems to be clear evidence that human beings collectively are risk averse and that they get more so as the stakes become larger.
There is also evidence of significant differences in risk aversion across individuals, with some showing no signs of risk aversion and some even seeking out risk.II.
Differences across different gambles/settings

 Experimental studies of risk aversion indicate that the risk aversion of subjects varies depending upon how an experiment is structured.
For instance, risk aversion coefficients that emerge from lottery choices seem to differ from those that come from experimental auctions, with the same subjects.
Furthermore, subjects behave differently with differently structured auctions and risk aversion varies with the information that is provided to them about assets and with whether they have won or lost in prior rounds.
In this section, we consider some of the evidence of how experimental settings affect risk aversion and the implications:6 Holt, Charles A., and Laury, Susan K.
(2002), “Risk Aversion and Incentive Effects,” American Economic Review, Vol.
92(5).
7 Kachelmeier, Steven J., and Shehata, Mohamed (1992), "Examining Risk Preferences Under High Monetary Incentives: Experimental Evidence from the People's Republic of China", The American Economic Review, Vol.
82, No.
5.or on a trading floor.8

 8 Berg, Joyce E., and Thomas A.
Rietz (1997) “Do Unto Others: A Theory and Experimental Test of Interpersonal Factors in Decision Making Under Uncertainty,” University of Iowa, Discussion Paper.
This is backed up by Dorsey, R.
E., and L.
Razzolini (1998) “Auctions versus Lotteries: Do Institutions Matter?,” University of Mississippi, Discussion Paper, presented at the Summer 1998 ESA Meeting.
9 Berg, J, J.
Dickhaut and K.
McCabe, 2005, Risk Preference Instability across Institutions: A Dilemma”, PNAS, vol 102, 4209-4214.
In an English clock auction, the price of an asset is set at the largest possible valuation and potential sellers then exit the auction as the price is lowered.
The last remaining seller sells the asset at the price at which the second to last seller exited the auction.
In a first-price auction, potential buyers of an asset submit sealed bids simultaneously for an asset and the highest bidder receives the asset at her bid-price.
10 Isaac, R Mark & James, Duncan, 2000.
"Just Who Are You Calling Risk Averse?," Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, Springer, vol.
20(2), pages 177-87.
11 Reynolds, S.S.
and J.
Wooders, 2005, Auctions with a Buy Price, Working Paper, University of Arizona.
The key difference between the two auctions arises when the seller specified a buy-now price; in the eBay auction, the buy-now option disappears as soon as a bid is placed, whereas it remains visible in the Yahoo! auction.that subjects who get the most frequent feedback (and thus information about their gains and losses) are more risk averse than investors who get less information.12 Camerer and Weigelt investigated the effects of revealing information to some traders and not to others in experiments and uncovered what they called “information mirages” where traders who did not receive information attributed information to trades where such information did not exist.
These mirages increase price volatility and result in prices drifting further from fair value.13In summary, the risk aversion of human beings depends not only on the choices they are offered, but on the setting in which these choices are presented.
The same investment may be viewed as riskier if offered in a different environment and at a different time to the same person.III.
Risk Aversion Differences across sub-groups

 While most would concede that some individuals are more risk averse than others, are there significant differences across sub-groups? In other words, are females more risk averse than males? How about older people versus younger people? What effect do experience and age have on risk aversion? In this section, we consider some of the experimental evidence in this regard:evidence, Holt and Laury find that increasing the stakes removes the sex differences

 12 Kahneman, D., A.
Schwartz, R.
Thaler and A.
Tversky, 1997, The Effect of Myopic Loss Aversion on Risk Taking: An Experimental Test, Quarterly Journal of Economics, v112, 647-661.
13 Camerer, C.
and K.
Weigelt, 1991, Information Mirages in Experimental Asset Markets, Journal of Business, v64, 463-493.
14 Byrnes, James P., Miller, David C., and Schafer, William D.
“Gender Differences in Risk Taking: A Meta-Analysis.” Psychological Bulletin, 1999, 125: 367-383.
15 Levy, Haim, Elron, Efrat, and Cohen, Allon.
"Gender Differences in Risk Taking and Investment Behavior: An Experimental Analysis." Unpublished manuscript, The Hebrew University, 1999.in risk aversion.16 In other words, while men may be less risk averse than women with small bets, they are as risk averse, if not more, for larger, more consequential bets.2002, which we referenced earlier, found no race-based differences in risk aversion.

 It should come as no surprise to any student of human behavior but there are wide differences in risk aversion across individuals.
The interesting question for risk management is whether policies on risk at businesses should be tailored to the owners of these businesses.
In other words, should risk be perceived more negatively in a company where stockholders are predominantly older women than in a company held primarily by young males? If so, should there be more risk hedging at the former and strategic risk

 16 Holt, Charles A.
and Susan K.
Laury, Susan K.
“Risk Aversion and Incentive Effects.” American Economic Review, 2002, 92(5): 1644-55 17 Dyer, Douglas, John H.
Kagel, and Dan Levin (1989) “A Comparison of Naive and Experienced Bidders in Common Value Offer Auctions: A Laboratory Analysis,” Economic Journal, 99:394 (March), 108-115.
18 Harrison, G.W., M.I.Lau and E.E.
Rutstrom, 2004, Estimating Risk Attitudes in Denmark,: A Field Experiment, Working Paper, University of Central Florida.taking at the latter? Casual empiricism suggests that this proposition is not an unreasonable one and that the risk management practices at firms reflect the risk aversion of both the owners and the managers of these firms.IV.
Other Risk Aversion Evidence

 The most interesting evidence from experiments, though, is not in what they tell us about risk aversion in general but in what we learn about quirks in human behavior, even in the simplest of settings.
In fact, Kahneman and Tversky’s challenge to conventional economic utility theory was based upon their awareness of the experimental research in psychology.
In this section, we will cover some of the more important of these findings:19 Tversky, A.
and Kahneman, D.
(1981), “The Framing of Decisions and the Psychology of Choice,” Science 211.
453–458.Of the respondents, 84% chose the sure option A over option B (with the same expected payout but much greater risk), which was not surprising, given risk aversion.
They then reframed the question and offered the same subjects the following choices:Now, 73% of respondents preferred the gamble (with an expected loss of $750) over the certain loss.
Kahneman and Tversky noted that stating the question in terms of a gain resulted in different choices than framing it in terms of a loss.20 Loss aversion implies that individuals will prefer an uncertain gamble to a certain loss as long as the gamble has the possibility of no loss, even though the expected value of the uncertain loss may be higher than the certain loss.Benartzi and Thaler combined loss aversion with the frequency with which individuals checked their accounts (what they called “mental accounting”) to create the composite concept of myopic loss aversion.21 Haigh and List provided an experimental test that illustrates the proposition where they ran a sequence of nine lotteries with subjects, but varied how they provided information on the outcomes.22 To one group, they provided feedback after each round, allowing them to thus react to success or failure on that round.
To the other group, they withheld feedback until three rounds were completed and provided feedback on the combined outcome over the three rounds.
They found that people were willing to bet far less in the frequent feedback group than in the pooled feedback group, suggesting that loss aversion becomes more acute if individuals have shorter time horizons and assess success orfailure at the end of these horizons.averse) with found money (i.e.
money obtained easily) than with earned money.Consider the experiment where ten subjects were each given $ 30 at the start of the game and offered the choice of either doing nothing or flipping a coin to win or lose $9; seven chose the coin flip.
Another set of ten subjects were offered no initial funds but offered a choice of either taking $ 30 with certainty or flipping a coin and winning $ 39, if it came up heads, or $21, if it came up tails.
Only 43% chose the coin flip, even though the final consequences (ending up with $21 or $39) are the same in both experiments.
Thaler and Johnson illustrate the house money effect with an experiment where subjects are offered a sequence of lotteries.
In the first lottery, subjects were given a chance to win $15 and were offered a subsequent lottery where they had a 50:50 chance of winning or losing $4.50.
While many of these same subjects would have rejected the second lottery, offered as an initial choice, 77% of those who won the first lottery (and made$15) took the second lottery.23and break even.24

 22 Haigh, M.S.
and J.A.
List, 2005, Do Professional Traders exhibit Myopic Loss Aversion? An Experimental Analysis, Journal of Finance, v45, 523-534.
23 Thaler, R.H.
and Johnson, E.J.
(1990), “Gambling with the House Money and Trying to Break Even: The Effects of Prior Outcomes on Risky Choice,” Management Science 36, 643–660.
They also document a house-loss effect, where those who lose in the initial lottery become more risk averse at the second stage but the evidence from other experimental studies on this count is mixed.
24 Battalio, R.C., Kagel, J.H., and Jiranyakul K.
(1990), “Testing Between Alternative Models of Choice Under Uncertainty: Some Initial Results,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 3, 25–50.

 In summary, the findings from experimental studies offer grist for the behavioral finance mill.
Whether we buy into all of the implications or not, there can be no arguing that there are systematic quirks in human behavior that cannot be easily dismissed as irrational or aberrant since they are so widespread and longstanding.

 As a side note, many of these experimental studies have been run using inexperienced subjects (usually undergraduate students) and professionals (traders in financial markets, experienced business people) to see if age and experience play a role in making people more rational.
The findings are not promising for the “rational” human school, since the consensus view across these studies is that experience and age do not seem to confer rationality in subjects and that some of the anomalies noted in this section are exacerbated with experience.
Professional traders exhibit more myopic loss aversion than undergraduate students, for instance.
The behavioral patterns indicated in this section are also replicated in experiments using business settings (projects with revenues, profits and losses) and experienced managers.25Finally, we should resist the temptation to label these behaviors as irrational.

 Much of what we observe in human behavior seems to be hard wired into our systems and cannot be easily eliminated (if at all).
In fact, a study in the journal Psychological Science in 2005 examined the decisions made by fifteen people with normal IQ and reasoning skills but with damage to the portions of the brain that controls emotions.26 They confronted this group and a control group of normal individuals with 20 rounds of a lottery, where they could win $2.50 or lose a dollar and found that the inability to feel emotions such as fear and anxiety made the brain damaged individuals more willing to take risks with high payoffs and less likely to react emotionally to previous wins and losses.
Overall, the brain impaired participants finished with about 13% higher winnings than normal people who were offered the same gambles.
If we accept these findings, a computer or robot may be a much better risk manager than the most rational humanbeing.

 25 Sullivan, K., 1997, Corporate Managers’s Risky Behavior: Risk Taking or Avoiding, Journal of Financial and Strategic Decisions, v10, 63-74.
26 Baba, S., G.
Lowenstein, A.
Bechara, H.
Damasio and A.
Damasio, Investment Behavior and the Negative Side of Emotion, Psychological Science, v16, pp435-439.
The damage to the individuals was created by strokes or disease and prevented them from feeling emotions.

 If we take these findings to heart, there are some interesting implications for risk management.
First, it may be prudent to take the human element out of risk management systems since the survival skills we (as human beings) have accumulated as a result of evolution undercut our abilities to be effective risk managers.
Second, the notion that better and more timely information will lead to more effective risk management may be misplaced, since more frequent feedback seems to affect our risk aversion and skew our actions.
Finally, the reason risk management systems break down in a big way may be traced to one or more these behavioral quirks.
Consider the example of Amaranth, a hedge fund that was forced to close down because a single trader exposed it to a loss of billions of dollars by doubling up his bets on natural gas prices, even as the market moved against him.
The behavior is consistent with the break-even effect, as the trader attempted to make back what he had lost in prior trades with riskier new trades.

 In contrast to experiments, where relatively few subjects are observed in a controlled environment, survey approaches look at actual behavior – portfolio choices and insurance decisions, for instance- across large samples.
Much of the evidence from surveys dovetails neatly into the findings from the experimental studies, though there are some differences that emerge.Survey Design

 How can we survey individuals to assess their risk attitudes? Asking them whether they are risk averse and if so, by how much, is unlikely to yield any meaningful results since each individual’s definition of both risk and risk aversion will be different.
To get around this problem, there are three ways in which risk surveys are done:include houses, cars and human capital, the proportion invested in risky assets stays constant, consistent with constant relative risk aversion.27 Other studies using the same approach also find evidence that wealthier people invest smaller proportions of their wealth in risky assets (declining relative risk aversion) than poorer people.attributed to risk aversion.30Survey FindingsThe evidence from surveys about risk aversion is for the most part consistent with the findings from experimental studies.
Summarizing the findings:

 27 Friend, I.
and M.E.
Blume.
“The Demand for Risky Assets”, American Economic Review, December 1975: 900-22.
28 Dohmen, T., J., A.
Falk, D.
Huffman, J.
Schuupp, U.Sunde and G.G.
Wagner, 2006, Individual Risk Attitudes: New Evidence from a Large, Representative, Experimentally-Validated Survey, Working Paper, CEPR.
29 Szpiro, George G, 1986.
"Measuring Risk Aversion: An Alternative Approach," The Review of Economics and Statistics, MIT Press, vol.
68(1), pages 156-59.
30 Cichetti, C.J.
y J.A.
Dubin (1994), “A microeconometric analysis of risk aversion and the decision to self insure”, Journal of Political Economy, Vol.
102, 169-186.
An alternate story would be that the personnel selling this insurance are so persistent that most individuals are willing to pay $0.19 a month for the privilege of not having to listen to more sales pitches.the ageing of the population.33

 31 Jianakoplos N.
A.
and A.
Bernasek, 1998, “Are Women More Risk Averse”, Economic Inquiry.
32 Morin, R.A.
and F.
Suarez.
“Risk Aversion Revisited”, Journal of Finance, September 1983: 1201-16.
33 Bakshi, G.
and Z.
Chen.
“Baby Boom, Population Aging, and Capital Markets”, Journal of Business, Vol.
67, No.
2, 1994: 165-202.
34 Jianakoplos N.
A.
and A.
Bernasek, 1998, “Are Women More Risk Averse”, Economic Inquiry.
35 Riley, W.B.
and K.V.
Chow.
“Asset Allocation and Individual Risk Aversion”, Financial Analysts Journal, November/December 1992: 32-7.Critiquing Survey Evidence

 Comparing experiments to surveys, surveys have the advantage of larger sample sizes, but the disadvantage of not being able to control for other factors.
Experiments allow researchers to analyze risk in tightly controlled environments, resulting in cleaner measures of risk aversion.
However, as we noted earlier, the measures themselves are highly sensitive to how the experiments are constructed and conducted.

 The quality of the survey evidence is directly related to how carefully constructed a survey is.
A good survey will draw a high proportion of the potential participants, have no sampling bias and allow the researcher to draw clear distinctions between competing hypotheses.
In practice, surveys tend to have low response rates and there are serious problems with sampling bias.
The people who respond to surveys might not be a representative sample.
To give credit to the authors of the studies that we quote in this section, they are acutely aware of this possibility and try to minimize in through their survey design and subsequent statistical tests.

 The financial markets represent experiments in progress, with millions of subjects expressing their risk preferences by how they price risky assets.
Though the environment is not tightly controlled, the size of the experiment and the reality that large amounts of money are at stake (rather than the small stakes that one sees in experiments) should mean that the market prices of risky assets provide more realistic measures of risk aversion than either simple experiments or surveys.
In this section, we will consider how asset prices can be used to back measures of risk aversion, and whether the evidence is consistent with the findings from other approaches.Measuring the Equity Risk Premium

 If we consider in investing in stocks as a risky alternative to investing risklessly in treasury bonds, we can use level of the stock market to back out how much investors are demanding for being exposed to equity risk.
This is the idea behind an implied equity risk premium.
Consider, for instance, a very simple valuation model for stocks.

 This is essentially the present value of dividends growing at a constant rate in perpetuity.
Three of the four variables in this model can be obtained externally – the current level of the market (i.e., value), the expected dividends next period and the expected growth rate in earnings and dividends in the long term.
The only “unknown” is then the required return on equity; when we solve for it, we get an implied expected return on stocks.
Subtracting out the riskfree rate will yield an implied equity risk premium.
As investors become more risk averse, they will demand a larger premium for risk and pay less for the same set of cash flows (dividends).

 To illustrate, assume that the current level of the S&P 500 Index is 900, the expected dividend yield on the index for the next period is 3% and the expected growth rate in earnings and dividends in the long term is 6%.
Solving for the required return on equity yields the following:Solving for r,r - 0.06 = 0.03r=0.09 =9%If the current riskfree rate is 6%, this will yield an equity risk premium of 3%.

 This approach can be generalized to allow for high growth for a period and extended to cover cash flow based, rather than dividend based, models.
To illustrate this, consider the S&P 500 Index on January 1, 2006.
The index was at 1248.29 and the dividend yield on the index in 2005 was roughly 3.34%.36 In addition, assume that the consensus estimate37 of growth in earnings for companies in the index was approximately 8% for the next 5 years and the 10-year treasury bond rate on that day was 4.39%.
Since a growth rate of 8% cannot be sustained forever, we employ a two-stage valuation model, where we allow dividends and buybacks to grow at 8% for 5 years and then lower the36 Stock buybacks during the year were added to the dividends to obtain a consolidated yield.
37 We used the average of the analyst estimates for individual firms (bottom-up).
Alternatively, we could have used the top-down estimate for the S&P 500 earnings.growth rate to the treasury bond rate of 4.39% after the 5 year period.38 Table 3.1 summarizes the expected cash flows for the next 5 years of high growth and the first year of stable growth thereafter.If we assume that these are reasonable estimates of the cash flows and that the index is correctly priced, then

 Note that the last term of the equation is the terminal value of the index, based upon the stable growth rate of 4.39%, discounted back to the present.
Solving for r in this equation yields us the required return on equity of 8.47%.
Subtracting out the treasury bond rate of 4.39% yields an implied equity premium of 4.08%.

 The advantage of this approach is that it is market-driven and current and it does not require any historical data.
Thus, it can be used to estimate implied equity premiums in any market.
It is, however, bounded by whether the model used for the valuation is the right one and the availability and reliability of the inputs to that model.Equity Risk Premium over TimeThe implied equity premiums change over time much more than historical risk premiums.
In fact, the contrast between these premiums and the historical premiums is best illustrated by graphing out the implied premiums in the S&P 500 going back to 196038 The treasury bond rate is the sum of expected inflation and the expected real rate.
If we assume that real growth is equal to the real rate, the long term stable growth rate should be equal to the treasury bond rate.1.
Investors are risk averse: The fact that the implied equity risk premium is positive indicates that investors require a reward (in the form of higher expected returns) for taking on risk.

 2.
Risk aversion changes over time: If we the risk premium as a measure of risk aversion for investors collectively, there seems to be clear evidence that investors becomes more risk averse over some periods and less risk averse in others.
In figure 3.1, for instance, this collective measure of risk aversion increased during the inflationary seventies, and then went through a two-decade period where it declined to reach historic lows at the end of 1999 (coinciding with the peak of the bull market of the 1990s).
It bounced back again in the short and sharp market correction that followed and has remained fairly stable since 2001.The implied equity risk premium also brings home an important point.
Risk premiums and stock prices generally move in opposite directions.
Stock prices are highest when investors demand low risk premiums and should decrease as investors become more risk averse, pushing up risk premiums.The Equity Risk Premium Puzzle

 While the last section provided a forward-looking estimate of equity risk premiums, we can also obtain a historical equity risk premium by looking at how much investors have earned investing in stocks, as opposed to investing in government securities in the past.
For instance, an investment in stocks in the United States would have earned 4.80% more annually, on a compounded basis between 1928 and 2005, than an investment in ten-year treasury bonds over the same period.39 While the premium does change depending upon the time period examined, stocks have consistently earned three to five percent more, on an annual basis, than government bonds for much of the last century.

 In a widely cited paper, Mehra and Prescott argued that the observed historical risk premiums (which they estimated at about 6% at the time of their analysis) were too high, and that investors would need implausibly high risk aversion coefficients to demand these premiums.40 In the years since, there have been many attempts to provide explanationsfor this puzzle:investment over the rest of the century.
This view is backed up by a study of

 39 On a simple average basis, the premium is even larger and exceeds 6%.
40 Mehra, Rajnish, and Edward C.Prescott, 1985, The Equity Premium: A Puzzle' Journal Monetary Economics 15 (1985), pp.
145–61.
Using a constant relative risk aversion utility function and plausible risk aversion coefficients, they demonstrate the equity risk premiums should be much lower (less than 1%).seventeen equity markets over the twentieth century, which concluded that the historical risk premium is closer to 4% than the 6% cited by Mehra and Prescott.41 However, even the lower risk premium would still be too high, if we assumed reasonable risk aversion coefficients.premium does not.the surge in equity risk premiums.counter argument is that individuals will choose a lower and more stable level of

 41 Dimson, E., P.
March and M.
Staunton, 2002, Triumph of the Optimists, Princeton University Prsss.
42 To those who argue that this will never happen in a mature equity market, we offer the example of the Nikkei which dropped from 40,000 in the late eighties to less than 10,000 a decade later.
Investors who bought stocks at the peak will probably not live to see capital gains on their investments.wealth and consumption that they can sustain over the long term over a higher level of wealth that varies widely from period to period.44 One reason may be that individuals become used to maintaining past consumption levels and that even small changes in consumption can cause big changes in marginal utility.45 Investing in stocks works against this preference by creating more instability in wealth over periods, adding to wealth in good periods and taking away from it in bad periods.
In more intuitive terms, your investment in stocks will tend to do well when the economy in doing well and badly during recessions, when you may very well find yourself out of a job.
To compensate, you will demand a larger premium for investing in equities.research).The bottom line is that observed equity risk premiums cannot be explained using conventional expected utility theory.
Here again, the behavioral quirks that we observed in both experiments and surveys may help in explaining how people price risky assets and why the prices change over time.

 43 McGrattan, E.R., and E.C.
Prescott.
2001.
“Taxes, Regulations, and Asset Prices.” Working Paper No.
610, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
44 Epstein, L.G., and S.E.
Zin.
1991.
“Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: An Empirical Analysis.” Journal of Political Economy, vol.
99, no.
2 (April):263–286.
45 Constantinides, G.M.
1990.
“Habit Formation: A Resolution of the Equity Premium Puzzle.” Journal of Political Economy, vol.
98, no.
3 (June):519–543.Beyond Equities

 The approach that we used to estimate the equity risk premium and, by extension, get a measure of risk aversion can be generalized to look at any asset class or even individual assets.
By looking at how investors price risky assets, we can get a sense of how investors assess risk and the price they charge for bearing it.

 For instance, we could look at how investors price bonds with default risk, relative to riskfree bonds, to gauge their attitudes toward risk.
If investors are risk neutral, the prices and interest rates on bonds should reflect the likelihood of default and the expected cost to the bondholder of such default; risk averse investors will attach a bigger discount to the bond price for the same default risk.
Studies of default spreads on corporate bonds yields results that are consistent not only with the proposition that bond investors are risk averse, but also with changing risk aversion over time.46

 We could also look at the pricing of options to measure investor risk aversion.
For instance, we can back out the risk neutral probabilities of future stock prices changes from option prices today.47 Comparing these probabilities with the actual returns can tell us about the risk aversion of option investors.
A study that estimated risk aversion coefficients using options on the S&P 500 index, in conjunction with actual returns on the index, concluded that they were well behaved prior to the 1987 stock market crash – risk aversion coefficients were positive and decreased with wealth – but that they changed dramatically after the crash, becoming negative in some cases and increasing with wealth.48 An examination of options on the FTSE 100 and S&P 500 options from 1992 to 2001 concluded that risk aversion coefficients were consistent across utility functions and markets, but that they tended to decline with forecast horizon and increaseduring periods of low market volatility.49

 46 Wu, C.
and C.
Yu, 1996, Risk Aversion and the yield of corporate debt, Journal of Banking and Finance, v20, 267-281.
47 The risk neutral probability can be written as a function of the subjective (and conventional) probability estimate and a risk aversion coefficient.
Risk neutral probability = Subjective probability * Risk aversion coefficient 48 Jackwerth, J.C.,2000, Recovering Risk Aversion from Option Prices and Realized Returns, The Review of Financial Studies, v13, 433-451.
49 Bliss, R.R.
and N.
Panigirtzoglou, 2001, Recovering Risk Aversion from Options, Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.In summary, studies of other risky asset markets confirm the findings in equity markets that investors are risk averse, in the aggregate, and that this risk aversion changes over time.The Limitations of Market Prices

 While markets are large, ongoing experiments, they are also complicated and isolating risk aversion can be difficult to do.
Unlike a controlled experiment, where all subjects are faced with the same risky choices, investors in markets tend to have different information about and views on the assets that they are pricing.
Thus, we have to make simplifying assumptions to back out measures of the risk premium.
With the equity risk premium, for instance, we used a two-stage dividend discount model and analyst estimates of growth to compute the equity risk premium.
Any errors we make in model specification and inputs to the model will spill over into our risk premium estimates.Notwithstanding these limitations, market prices offer valuable clues about changes in risk aversion over time.
In summary, they indicate that expected utility models fall short in explaining how individuals price risky assets and that there are significant shifts in the risk aversion of populations over time.

 Some of the most anomalous evidence on risk aversion comes from studies of how individuals behave when at the race traces and in casinos, and in recent years, on game shows.
In many ways, explaining why humans gamble has been a challenge to economists, since the expected returns (at least based upon probabilities) are negative and the risk is often substantial.
Risk averse investors with well behaved utility functions would not be gamblers but this section presents evidence that risk seeking is not unusual.Horse Tracks and Gambling

 Gambling is big business.
At horse tracks, casinos and sports events, individuals bet huge amounts of money each year.
While some may contest the notion, there can be no denying that gambling is a market like any other, where individual make their preferences clear by what they do.
Over the last few decades, the data from gamblingevents has been examined closely by economists, trying to understand how individuals behave when confronted with risky choices.

 In a survey article, Hausch, Ziemba and Rubinstein examined the evidence from studies of horse track betting and found that there were strong and stable biases in their findings.
First, they found that people paid too little for favorites and too much for long shots50.
In particular, one study that they quote computed rates of returns from betting on horses in different categories, and concluded that bettors could expect to make positive returns by betting on favorites (9.2%) but very negative returns (-23.7%) by betting on long odds.51 Second, they noted that bettors tended to bet more on longer odds horses as they lost money, often in a desperate attempt to recover from past losses.

 This long shot bias is now clearly established in the literature and there have been many attempts to explain it.
One argument challenges the conventional view (and the evidence from experimental studies and surveys) that human beings are risk averse.
Instead, it posits that gamblers are risk lovers and are therefore drawn to the higher risk in long shot bets.52 The other arguments are consistent with risk aversion, but require assumptions about behavioral quirks or preferences and include the following:50 Hausch, D.B., W.T.
Ziemba and M.
Rubinstein, 1981, Efficiency of the Market for Racetrack Betting, Management Science 51 Snyder, W.W., “Horse Racing: Testing the Efficient Markets Model,” Journal of Finance 33 (1978) pp.
1109-1118.
52 Quandt, R.
(1986), “Betting and Equilibrium”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 101, 201-207.53 Griffith, R.
(1949), “Odds Adjustment by American Horses Race Bettors”,American Journal of Psychology, 62, 290-294.
54 Thaler, R.
and W.
Ziemba (1988), “Anomalies—Parimutuel Betting Markets: Racetracks and Lotteries”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2, 161- 174.payoffs, i.e.
indvidiuals attach additional utility to very large payoffs, even when the probabilities of receiving them are very small.55

 Researchers have also used data from racetrack betting to fit utility functions to bettors.
Wietzman looked at betting in 12000 races between 1954 and 1963 and generated utility functions that are consistent with risk loving rather than risk averse individuals.56 While a few other researchers back up this conclusion, Jullien and Salane argue that gamblers are risk averse and that their seeming risk seeking behavior can be attributed to incorrect assessments of the probabilities of success and failure.57 Extending the analysis from horse tracks to other gambling venues – casino gambling and lotteries, for instance – studies find similar results.
Gamblers willingly enter into gambles where the expected returns from playing are negative and exhibit a bias towards gambles with low probabilities of winning but big payoffs (the long shot bias).The final set of studies that we will reference are relatively recent and they mine data obtained from how contestants behave on game shows, especially when there is no skill involved and substantial amounts of money at stake.

 55 Golec, J.
and M.
Tamarkin, 1998, Bettors Love Skewness, Not Risk, at the Horse Track, Journal of Political Economy 106, 205-225.
A study of lottery game players by Garrett and Sobel backs up this view; Garret, T.A, and R.S.
Sobel, 2004, Gamblers Favor Skewness, Not Risk: Further Evidence from United States’ Lottery Games, Working Paper.
56 Weitzman, M.
(1965), “Utility Analysis and Group Behavior: An Empirical Study”, Journal of Political Economy, 73, 18-26.
57 Jullien, B.
and B.
Salanie, 2005, Empirical Evidence on the Preferences of Racetrack Bettors, chapter in Efficiency of Sports and Lottery Markets, Edited by D.
Hausch and W.
Ziemba, 58 Gertner, R.
(1993).
`Game Shows and Economic Behavior: ``Risk-taking'' on ``Card Sharks''', Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
108, no.
2, pp.
507±21.neutrality than aversion when they wager their winnings in Final Jeopardy, and that they make more “rational” decisions when their problems are simpler.59In a study of the popular game show “Deal or No Deal”, Post, Baltussen and Van den Assem examine how contestants behaved when asked to make choices in 53 episodes from Australia and the Netherlands.
In the show, twenty-six models each hold a briefcase that contains a sum of money (varying from one cent to $1 million in the U.S.
game).
The contestant picks one briefcase as her own and then begins to open the other 25, each time, by process of elimination, revealing a little more about what his own case might hold.
At the end, the contestant can also trade her briefcase for the last unopened one.
Thus, contestants are offered numerous opportunities where they can either take a fixed sum (the suitcase that is open) or an uncertain gamble (the unopened suitcase).
Since both the fixed sum and the gamble change with each attempt, we are observing certainty equivalents in action.
The researchers find evidence of overall risk aversion but they also note that there are big differences across contestants, with some even exhibiting risk seeking behavior.
Finally, they back up some of the “behavioral quirks” we noted earlier when talking about experimental studies, with evidence that contestant risk aversion is dependent upon prior outcomes (with failure making contestants more risk averse) and for the break even effect (where risk aversion decreases following earlier losses and a chance torecoup these losses).60

 59 Metrick, A.
(1995).
`A Natural experiment in ``Jeopardy!''', American Economic Review, vol.
58, pp.
240-53.
In Final Jeopardy, the three contestants on the show decide how much of the money winnings they have accumulated over the show they want to best of the final question, with the recognition that only the top money winner will win.
60 Post, T., G.
.Baltussent and M.
Van den Assem, 2006, Deal or No Deal, Working paper, Erasmus University.contestant.
The key component examined in this paper is whether the contestant chooses to use the second spin, since spinning again increases the point total but also increases the chance of going over 100 points.
This study finds that contestants were more likely to make “irrational” decisions when faced with complicated scenarios than with simple ones, suggesting that risk aversion is tied to computational ability and decision biases.

 In summary, game shows offer us a chance to observe how individuals behave when the stakes are large (relative to the small amounts offered in experimental studies) and decisions have to be made quickly.
The consensus finding from these studies is that contestants on game shows are risk averse but not always rational, over estimating their probabilities of success in some cases and behaving in unpredictable (and not always sensible) ways in complicated scenarios.As you can see, the evidence about risk aversion comes from a variety of different sources and there are both common findings and differences across the different

 61 Tenorio and Cason, 62 Beetsma, R.
and P.
Schotman, 2001.
Measuring Risk Attitudes in a Natural Experiment: Data from the TelevisionGame Show Lingo, Economic Journal, October 2001 63 Hartley, R., G.
Lanot and I.
Walker, 2005, Who Really Wants to be a Millionaire: Estimates of Risk Aversion from Game Show Data, Working Paper, University of Warwick.approaches.
We can look at all of the evidence and summarize what we see as the emerging consensus on risk aversion:

 In summary, the notion of a representative individual, whose utility function and risk aversion coefficient can stand in for the entire population, is difficult to hold on to, given both the diversity in risk aversion across individuals and the anomalies (at least from the perspective of the perfectly rational utility seeker) that remain so difficult to explain.

 Investors hate risk and love it.
They show clear evidence of both risk aversion and of risk seeking.
In this chapter, we examine the basis for these contradictory statements by looking at the evidence on risk aversion in the population, acquired through a number of approaches – experiments, surveys, financial market prices and from observing gamblers.
Summing up the evidence, investors are generally risk averse but some are much more so than others; in fact, a few are risk neutral or even risk loving.
Some of the differences in risk aversion can be attributed to systematic factors such as age, sex and income, but a significant portion is random.

 The interesting twist in the findings is that there are clear patterns in risk taking that are not consistent with the rational utility maximizer in classical economics.
The ways we act when faced with risky choices seem to be affected by whether we face gains or losses and how the choices are framed.
While it is tempting to label this behavior as anomalous, it occurs far too often and in such a wide cross section of the population that it should be considered the norm rather than the exception.
Consequently, how we measure and manage risk has to take into account these behavioral quirks.

 If you accept the argument that risk matters and that it affects how managers and investors make decisions, it follows logically that measuring risk is a critical first step towards managing it.
In this chapter, we look at how risk measures have evolved over time, from a fatalistic acceptance of bad outcomes to probabilistic measures that allow us to begin getting a handle on risk, and the logical extension of these measures into insurance.
We then consider how the advent and growth of markets for financial assets has influenced the development of risk measures.
Finally, we build on modern portfolio theory to derive unique measures of risk and explain why they might be not in accordance with probabilistic risk measures.

 Risk and uncertainty have been part and parcel of human activity since its beginnings, but they have not always been labeled as such.
For much of recorded time, events with negative consequences were attributed to divine providence or to the supernatural.
The responses to risk under these circumstances were prayer, sacrifice (often of innocents) and an acceptance of whatever fate meted out.
If the Gods intervened on our behalf, we got positive outcomes and if they did not, we suffered; sacrifice, on the other hand, appeased the spirits that caused bad outcomes.
No measure of risk was therefore considered necessary because everything that happened was pre-destined and driven by forces outside our control.

 This is not to suggest that the ancient civilizations, be they Greek, Roman or Chinese, were completely unaware of probabilities and the quantification of risk.
Games of chance were common in those times and the players of those games must have recognized that there was an order to the uncertainty.1 As Peter Bernstein notes in his splendid book on the history of risk, it is a mystery why the Greeks, with their considerable skills at geometry and numbers, never seriously attempted to measure thelikelihood of uncertain events, be they storms or droughts, occurring, turning instead to priests and fortune tellers.2

 Notwithstanding the advances over the last few centuries and our shift to more modern, sophisticated ways of analyzing uncertainty, the belief that powerful forces beyond our reach shape our destinies is never far below the surface.
The same traders who use sophisticated computer models to measure risk consult their astrological charts and rediscover religion when confronted with the possibility of large losses.

 Given the focus on fate and divine providence that characterized the way we thought about risk until the Middle Ages, it is ironic then that it was an Italian monk, who initiated the discussion of risk measures by posing a puzzle in 1494 that befuddled people for almost two centuries.
The solution to his puzzle and subsequent developments laid the foundations for modern risk measures.

 Luca Pacioli, a monk in the Franciscan order, was a man of many talents.
He is credited with inventing double entry bookkeeping and teaching Leonardo DaVinci mathematics.
He also wrote a book on mathematics, Summa de Arithmetica, that summarized all the knowledge in mathematics at that point in time.
In the book, he also presented a puzzle that challenged mathematicians of the time.
Assume, he said, that two gamblers are playing a best of five dice game and are interrupted after three games, with one gambler leading two to one.
What is the fairest way to split the pot between the two gamblers, assuming that the game cannot be resumed but taking into account the state of the game when it was interrupted?With the hindsight of several centuries, the answer may seem simple but we have to remember that the notion of making predictions or estimating probabilities had not developed yet.
The first steps towards solving the Pacioli Puzzle came in the early part of

 1 Chances are….
Adventures in Probability, 2006, Kaplan, M.
and E.
Kaplan, Viking Books, New York.
The authors note that dice litter ancient Roman campsites and that the citizens of the day played a variant of craps using either dice or knucklebones of sheep.
2 Much of the history recounted in this chapter is stated much more lucidly and in greater detail by Peter Bernstein in his books “Against the Gods: The Remarkable Story of Risk” (1996) and “Capital Ideas: The Improbable Origins of Modern Wall Street (1992).
The former explains the evolution of our thinking on risk through the ages whereas the latter examines the development of modern portfolio theory.

 the sixteenth century when an Italian doctor and gambler, Girolamo Cardano, estimated the likelihood of different outcomes of rolling a dice.
His observations were contained in a book titled “Books on the Game of Chance”, where he estimated not only the likelihood of rolling a specific number on a dice (1/6), but also the likelihood of obtaining values on two consecutive rolls; he, for instance, estimated the probability of rolling two ones in a row to be 1/36.
Galileo, taking a break from discovering the galaxies, came to the same conclusions for his patron, the Grand Duke of Tuscany, but did not go much further than explaining the roll of the dice.

 It was not until 1654 that the Pacioli puzzle was fully solved when Blaise Pascal and Pierre de Fermat exchanged a series of five letters on the puzzle.
In these letters, Pascal and Fermat considered all the possible outcomes to the Pacioli puzzle and noted that with a fair dice, the gambler who was ahead two games to one in a best-of-five dice game would prevail three times out of four, if the game were completed, and was thus entitled to three quarters of the pot.
In the process, they established the foundations of probabilities and their usefulness not just in explaining the past but also in predicting the future.
It was in response to this challenge that Pascal developed his triangle of numbers for equal odds games, shown in figure 4.1:33 It should be noted that Chinese mathematicians constructed the same triangle five hundred years before Pascal and are seldom credited for the discovery.Figure 4.1: Pascal’s Triangle

 Pascal’s triangle can be used to compute the likelihood of any event with even odds occurring.
Consider, for instance, the odds that a couple expecting their first child will have a boy; the answer, with even odds, is one-half and is in the second line of Pascal’s triangle.
If they have two children, what are the odds of them having two boys, or a boy and a girl or two girls? The answer is in the second line, with the odds being ¼ on the first and the third combinations and ½ on the second.
In general, Pascal’s triangle provides the number of possible combination if an even-odds event is repeated a fixed number of times; if repeated N times, adding the numbers in the N+1 row and dividing each number by this total should yield the probabilities.
Thus, the couple that has six children can compute the probabilities of the various outcomes by going to the seventh row and adding up the numbers (which yields 64) and dividing each number by the total.
There is only a 1/64 chance that this couple will have six boys (or six girls), a 6/64chance of having five boys and a girl (or five girls and a boy) and so on.Pascal and Fermat fired the opening volley in the discussion of probabilities with their solution to the Pacioli Puzzle, but the muscle power for using probabilities was

 provided by Jacob Bernoulli, with his discovery of the law of large numbers.
Bernoulli proved that a random sampling of items from a population has the same characteristics, on average, as the population.4 He used coin flips to illustrate his point by noting that the proportion of heads (and tails) approached 50% as the number of coin tosses increased.
In the process, he laid the foundation for generalizing population properties from samples, a practice that now permeates both the social and economic sciences.

 The introduction of the normal distribution by Abraham de Moivre, an English mathematician of French extraction, in 1738 as an approximation for binomial distributions as sample sizes became larger, provided researchers with a critical tool for linking sample statistics with probability statements.
5 Figure 4.2 provides a picture of the normal distribution.Figure 4.2: Normal Distribution

 The bell curve, that characterizes the normal distribution, was refined by other mathematicians, including Laplace and Gauss, and the distribution is still referred to as the Gaussian distribution.
One of the advantages of the normal distribution is that it can be described with just two parameters – the mean and the standard deviation – and allows us to make probabilistic statements about sampling averages.
In the normal distribution, approximately 68% of the distribution in within one standard deviation of the mean, 95% is within two standard deviations and 98% within three standard deviations.
In fact, the distribution of a sum of independent variables approaches a normal distribution, which is the basis for the central limit theorem and allows us to use the normal distribution as an approximation for other distributions (such as the binomial).

 In 1763, Reverend Thomas Bayes published a simple way of updating existing beliefs in the light of new evidence.
In Bayesian statistics, the existing beliefs are called prior probabilities and the revised values after considering the new evidence are called posterior or conditional probabilities.6 Bayes provided a powerful tool for researchers who wanted to use probabilities to assess the likelihood of negative outcomes, and to update these probabilities as events unfolded.
In addition, Bayes’ rule allows us to start with subjective judgments about the likelihood of events occurring and to modify these judgments as new data or information is made available about these events.

 In summary, these developments allowed researchers to see that they could extend the practice of estimating probabilities from simple equal-odds events such as rolling a dice to any events that had uncertainty associated with it.
The law of large numbers showed that sampling means could be used to approximate population averages, with the precision increasing with sample size.
The normal distribution allows us to make probability statements about the sample mean.
Finally, Bayes’ rule allows us to estimate probabilities and revise them based on new sampling data.5 De Moivre, A., 1738, Doctrine of Chances.
6 Bayes, Rev.
T., "An Essay Toward Solving a Problem in the Doctrine of Chances", Philos.
Trans.
R.
Soc.
London 53, pp.
370-418 (1763); reprinted in Biometrika 45, pp.
293-315 (1958).The work done on probability, sampling theory and the normal distribution

 provided a logical foundation for the analysis of raw data.
In 1662, John Graunt created one of the first mortality tables by counting for every one hundred children born in London, each year from 1603 to 1661, how many were still living.
In the course of constructing the table, Graunt used not only refined the use of statistical tools and measures with large samples but also considered ways of dealing with data errors.
He estimated that while 64 out of every 100 made it age 6 alive, only 1 in 100 survived to be 76.
In an interesting aside, Graunt estimated the population of London in 1663 to be only 384,000, well below the then prevailing estimate of six to seven million.
He was eventually proved right, and London’s population did not exceed 6 million until three centuries later.
In 1693, Edmund Halley, the British mathematician, constructed the first life table from observations and also devised a method for valuing life annuities.
He pointed out that the government, that was selling life annuities to citizens at that time, was pricing them too low and was not setting the price independently of the age of theannuitant.

 Actuarial risk measures have become more sophisticated over time, and draw heavily on advances in statistics and data analysis, but the foundations still lies in the work done by Graunt and Halley.
Using historical data, actuaries estimate the likelihood of events occurring – from hurricanes in Florida to deaths from cancer – and the consequent losses.

 As long as risk has existed, people have been trying to protect themselves against its consequences.
As early as 1000 BC, the Babylonians developed a system where merchants who borrowed money to fund shipments could pay an extra amount to cancel the loan if the shipment was stolen.
The Greeks and the Romans initiated life insurance with “benevolent societies” which cared for families of society members, if they died.
However, the development of the insurance business was stymied by the absence of ways of measuring risk exposure.
The advances in assessing probabilities and the subsequent development of statistical measures of risk laid the basis for the modern insurancebusiness.
In the aftermath of the great fire of London in 1666, Nicholas Barbon opened “The Fire Office”, the first fire insurance company to insure brick homes.
Lloyd’s of London became the first the first large company to offer insurance to ship owners.

 Insurance is offered when the timing or occurrence of a loss is unpredictable, but the likelihood and magnitude of the loss are relatively predictable.
It is in the latter pursuit that probabilities and statistics contributed mightily.
Consider, for instance, how a company can insure your house against fire.
Historical data on fires can be used to assess the likelihood that your house will catch fire and the extent of the losses, if a fire occurs.
Thus, the insurance company can get a sense of the expected loss from the fire and charge an insurance premium that exceeds that cost, thus earning a profit.
By insuring a large number of houses against fire, they are drawing on Bernoulli’s law of large numbers to ensure that their profits exceed the expected losses over time.

 Even large, well-funded insurance companies have to worry, though, about catastrophes so large that they will be unable to meet their obligations.
Katrina, one of the most destructive hurricanes in memory, destroyed much of New Orleans in 2005 and left two states, Louisiana and Mississipi, in complete devastation; the total cost of damages was in excess of $ 50 billion.
Insurance companies paid out billions of dollars in claims, but none of the firms were put in serious financial jeopardy because of the practice of reinsuring, where insurance companies reduce their exposure to catastrophic risk through reinsurance.

 Since insurers are concerned primarily about losses (and covering those losses), insurance measures of risk are almost always focused on the downside.
Thus, a company that insures merchant ships will measure risk in terms of the likelihood of ships and cargo being damaged and the loss that accrues from the damage.
The potential for upside that exists has little or no relevance to the insurer since he does not share in it.As stock and bond markets developed around the world in the nineteenth century, investors started looking for richer measures of risk.
In particular, since investors in financial assets share in both upside and downside, the notion of risk primarily as a lossfunction (the insurance view) was replaced by a sense that risk could be a source of profit.

 There was little access to information and few ways of processing even that limited information in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
Not surprisingly, the risk measures used were qualitative and broad.
Investors in the financial markets during that period defined risk in terms of stability of income from their investments in the long term and capital preservation.
Thus, perpetual British government bonds called Consols, that offered fixed coupons forever were considered close to risk free, and a fixed rate long term bond was considered preferable to a shorter term bond with a higher rate.
In the risk hierarchy of that period, long term government bonds ranked as safest, followed by corporate bonds and stocks paying dividends and at the bottom were non-dividend paying stocks, a ranking that has not changed much since.

 Given that there were few quantitative measures of risk for financial assets, how did investors measure and manage risk? One way was to treat entire groups of investments as sharing the same risk level; thus stocks were categorized as risky and inappropriate investments for risk averse investors, no matter what their dividend yield.
The other was to categorize investments based upon how much information was available about the entity issuing it.
Thus, equity issued by a well-established company with a solid reputation was considered safer than equity issued by a more recently formed entity about which less was known.
In response, companies started providing more data on operations and making them available to potential investors.

 By the early part of the twentieth century, services were already starting to collect return and price data on individual securities and computing basic statistics such as the expected return and standard deviation in returns.
For instance, the Financial Review of Reviews, a British publication, examined portfolios of ten securities including bonds, preferred stock and ordinary stock in 1909, and measured the volatility of each security using prices over the prior ten years.
In fact, they made an argument for diversification by estimating the impact of correlation on their hypothetical portfolios.
(Appendix 1 includes the table from the publication).
Nine years previously, Louis Bachelier, a post- graduate student of mathematics at the Sorbonne, examined the behavior of stock and option prices over time in a remarkable thesis.
He noted that there was little correlationbetween the price change in one period and the price change in the next, thus laying the foundation for the random walk and efficient market hypothesis, though they were not fleshed out until almost sixty years later.7

 At about the same time, the access to and the reliability of financial reports from corporations were improving and analysts were constructing risk measures that were based upon accounting numbers.
Ratios of profitability (such as margin and return on capital) and financial leverage (debt to capital) were used to measure risk.
By 1915, services including the Standard Statistics Bureau (the precursor to Standard and Poor’s), Fitch and Moody’s were processing accounting information to provide bond ratings as measures of credit risk in companies.
Similar measures were slower to evolve for equities but stock rating services were beginning to make their presence felt well before the Second World War.
While these services did not exhibit any consensus on the right way to measure risk, the risk measures drew on both price volatility and accounting information.

 In his first edition of Security Analysis in 1934, Ben Graham argued against measures of risk based upon past prices (such as volatility), noting that price declines can be temporary and not reflective of a company’s true value.
He argued that risk comes from paying too high a price for a security, relative to its value and that investors should maintain a “margin of safety” by buying securities for less than their true worth.8 This is an argument that value investors from the Graham school, including Warren Buffett, continue to make to this day.By 1950, investors in financial markets were using measures of risk based upon past prices and accounting information, in conjunction with broad risk categories, based upon security type and issuer reputation, to make judgments about risk.
There was,

 7 Bachelier, L., 1900, Theorie De La Speculation, Annales Scientifiques de l’E´cole Normale Supe´rieure,1900, pp.21–86.
For an analysis of this paper’s contribution to mathematical finance, see Courtault, J.M., Y.
Kabanov, B.
Bru and P.
Crepel, 2000, Louis Bachelier: On the Centenary of the Theorie De La Speculation, Mathematical Finance, v10, 341-350.
8 Graham, B., 1949, The Intelligent Investor; Graham, B.
and D.
Dodd, 1934, Security Analysis, Reprint by McGraw Hill.
In “Intelligent Investor”, Graham proposed to measure the margin of safety by looking at the difference between the earnings yield on a stock (Earnings per share/ Market price) to the treasury bond rate; the larger the difference (with the former exceeding the latter), the greater the margin for safety.however, no consensus on how best to measure risk and the exact relationship between risk and expected return.

 The belief that diversification was beneficial to investors was already well in place before Harry Markowitz turned his attention to it in 1952.
In fact, our earlier excerpt from the Financial Review of Reviews from 1909 used correlations between securities to make the argument that investors should spread their bets and that a diversified portfolio would be less risky than investing in an individual security, while generating similar returns.
However, Markowitz changed the way we think about risk by linking the risk of a portfolio to the co-movement between individual assets in that portfolio.

 Markowitz was influenced by the work done by Von Neumann, Friedman and Savage on uncertainty.
In describing how he came up with the idea that gave rise to modern portfolio theory, Markowitz explains that he was reading John Burr Williams “Theory of Investment Value”, the book that first put forth the idea that the value of a stock is the present value of its expected dividends.9 He noted that if the value of a stock is the present value of its expected dividends and an investor were intent on only maximizing returns, he or she would invest in the one stock that had the highest expected dividends, a practice that was clearly at odds with both practice and theory at that time, which recommended investing in diversified portfolios.
Investors, he reasoned, must diversify because they care about risk, and the risk of a diversified portfolio must therefore be lower than the risk of the individual securities that went into it.
His key insight was that the variance of a portfolio could be written as a function not only of how much was invested in each security and the variances of the individual securities but also of thecorrelation between the securities.
By explicitly relating the variance of a portfolio to the

 covariances between individual securities, Markowitz not only put into concrete form what had been conventional wisdom for decades but also formulated a process by which investors could generate optimally diversified portfolios, i.e., portfolios that would maximize returns for any given level of risk (or minimize risk for any given level of return).
In his thesis, he derived the set of optimal portfolios for different levels of risk and called it the efficient frontier.10 He refined the process in a subsequent book that he wrote while he worked at the RAND corporation.11

 The Markowitz approach, while powerful and simple, boils investor choices down to two dimensions.
The “good” dimension is captured in the expected return on an investment and the “bad” dimension is the variance or volatility in that return.
In effect, the approach assumes that all risk is captured in the variance of returns on an investment and that all other risk measures, including the accounting ratios and the Graham margin of safety, are redundant.
There are two ways in which you can justify the mean-variance focus: one is to assume that returns are normally distributed and the other is to assume that investors’ utility functions push them to focus on just expected return and variance.

 Consider first the “normal distribution” assumption.
As we noted earlier in this chapter, the normal distribution is not only symmetric but can be characterized by just the mean and the variance.12 If returns were normally distributed, it follows then that the only two choice variables for investors would be the expected returns and standard deviations, thus providing the basis for the mean variance framework.
The problem with this assumption is that returns on most investments cannot be normally distributed.
The worst outcome you can have when investing in a stock is to lose your entire investment, translating into a return of -100% (and not -∞ as required in a normal distribution).

 9 See the Markowitz autobiography for the Nobel committee.
It can be accessed online at http://nobelprize.org/economics/laureates/1990/markowitz-autobio.html.
10 Markowitz, H.M.
1952.
“Portfolio Selection,” The Journal of Finance, 7(l): 77-91.
11 Markowitz, H.M.
1959.
Portfolio Selection: Efficient Diversification of Investments.
New York: Wiley (Yale University Press, 1970, Basil Blackwell, 1991).
12 Portfolios of assets that each exhibit normally distributed returns will also be normally distributed.
Lognormally distributed returns can also be parameterized with the mean and the variance, but portfolios of assets exhibiting lognormal returns may not exhibit lognormality.As for the “utility distribution” argument, consider the quadratic utility function, where utility is written as follows:U(W) = a + bW – cW2The quadratic utility function is graphed out in figure 4.3:Figure 4.3: Quadratic Utility Function

 Investors with quadratic utility functions care about only the level of their wealth and the variance in that level and thus have a mean-variance focus when picking investments.
While assuming a quadratic utility function may be convenient, it is not a plausible measure of investor utility for three reasons.
The first is that it assumes that investors are equally averse to deviations of wealth below the mean as they are to deviations above the mean.
The second is that individuals with quadratic utility functions exhibit decreasing absolute risk aversion, i.e., individuals invest less of their wealth (in absolute terms) in risky assets as they become wealthier.
Finally, there are ranges of wealth where investors actually prefer less wealth to more wealth; the marginal utility of wealth becomesnegative.

 Since both the normal distribution and quadratic utility assumptions can only be justified with contorted reasoning, how then how do you defend the mean-variance approach? The many supporters of the approach argue that the decisions based upon decisions based upon the mean and the variance come reasonably close to the optimum with utility functions other than the quadratic.
They also rationalize the use of the normal distribution by pointing out that returns may be log-normally distributed (in which case the log of the returns should be normally distributed) and that the returns on portfolios (rather than individual stocks), especially over shorter time periods, are more symmetric and thus closer to normality.
Ultimately, their main argument is that what is lost in precision (in terms of using a more realistic model that looks at more than expected returns and variances) is gained in simplicity.13If we accept the mean-variance framework, the implications for risk measurement are significant.

 13 Markowitz, defending the quadratic utility assumptions, notes that focusing on just the mean and the variance makes sense for changes 14 The only exception is if the information is perfect, i.e., investors have complete certainty about what will happen to a stock or investment.
In that case, they can invest their wealth in that individual asset and it will be riskfree.
In the real world, inside information gives you an edge over other investors but does not bestow its possessor with guaranteed profits.
Investors with such information would be better served spreading their wealth over multiple stocks on which they have privileged information rather than just one.covariance between the asset and the other assets in the portfolio becomes the dominant risk measure, rather than its variance.Whether one accepts the premise of the mean-variance framework or not, its introduction changed the way we think about risk from one where the risk of individual assets was assessed independently to one where asset risk is assessed relative to a portfolio of which the asset is a part.The revolution initiated by Harry Markowitz was carried to its logical conclusion

 by John Lintner, Jack Treynor and Bill Sharpe, with their development of the capital asset pricing model (CAPM).15 Sharpe and Linter added a riskless asset to the mix and concluded that there existed a superior alternative to investors at every risk level, created by combining the riskless asset with one specific portfolio on the efficient frontier.
Combinations of the riskless asset and the one super-efficient portfolio generate higher expected returns for every given level of risk than holding just a portfolio of risky assets.
(Appendix 2 contains a more complete proof of this conclusion) For those investors who desire less risk than that embedded in the market portfolio, this translates into investing a portion of their wealth in the super-efficient portfolio and the rest in the riskless assets.
Investors who want to take more risk are assumed to borrow at the riskless rate and invest that money in the super-efficient portfolio.
If investors follow this dictum, all investors should hold the one super-efficient portfolio, which should be supremely diversified, i.e., it should include every traded asset in the market, held in proportion to its market value.Thus, it is termed the market portfolio.To reach this result, the original version of the model did assume that there were no transactions costs or taxes and that investors had identical information about assets15 Sharpe, William F., 1961,.
Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under conditions of risk, Journal of Finance, 19 (3), 425-442; Lintner, J., 1965 The valuation of risk assets and the selection of risky

 (and thus shared the same estimates for the expected returns, standard deviations and correlation across assets).
In addition, the model assumed that all investors shared a single period time horizon and that they could borrow and invest at the riskfree rate.
Intuitively, the model eliminates any rationale for holding back on diversification.
After all, without transactions costs and differential information, why settle for any portfolio which is less than fully diversified? Consequently, any investor who holds a portfolio other than the market portfolio is not fully diversified and bears the related cost with no offsetting benefit.If we accept the assumptions (unrealistic though they may seem) of the capital asset pricing model, the risk of an individual asset becomes the risk added on to the market portfolio and can be measured statistically as follows:Covariance of asset with the market portfolioVariance of the maraket portfolio

 Thus, the CAPM extends the Markowitz insight about risk added to a portfolio by an individual asset to the special case where all investors hold the same fully diversified market portfolio.
Thus, the risk of any asset is a function of how it covaries with the market portfolio.
Dividing the covariance of every asset by the market portfolio to the market variance allows for the scaling of betas around one; an average risk investment has a beta around one, whereas investments with above average risk and below average risk have betas greater than and less than one respectively.

 In closing, though, accepting the CAPM requires us to accept the assumptions that the model makes about transactions costs and information but also the underlying assumptions of the mean-variance framework.
Notwithstanding its many critics, whose views we will examine in the next two sections, the widespread acceptance of the model and its survival as the default model for risk to this day is testimony to its intuitive appeal and simplicity.investments in stock portfolios and capital budgets, Review of Economics and Statistics, 47: 13-37; Treynor, Jack (1961).
Towards a theory of market value of risky assets, unpublished manuscript.

 From its very beginnings, the mean variance framework has been controversial.
While there have been many who have challenged its applicability, we will consider these challenges in three groups.
The first group argues that stock prices, in particular, and investment returns, in general, exhibit too many large values to be drawn from a normal distribution.
They argue that the “fat tails” on stock price distributions lend themselves better to a class of distributions, called power law distributions, which exhibit infinite variance and long periods of price dependence.
The second group takes issue with the symmetry of the normal distribution and argues for measures that incorporate the asymmetry observed in actual return distributions into risk measures.
The third group posits that distributions that allow for price jumps are more realistic and that risk measures should consider the likelihood and magnitude of price jumps.

 Benoit Mandelbrot, a mathematician who also did pioneering work on the behavior of stock prices, was one of those who took issue with the use of normal and lognormal distributions.16 He argued, based on his observation of stock and real asset prices, that a power-law distribution characterized them better.17 In a power-law distribution, the relationship between two variables, Y and X can be written as follows:

 In this equation, α is a constant (constant of proportionality) and k is the power law exponent.
Mandelbrots key point was that the normal and log normal distributions were best suited for series that exhibited mild and well behaved randomness, whereas power law distributions were more suited for series which exhibited large movements and what

 16 Mandelbrot, B., 1961, The Variation of Certain Speculative Prices, Journal of Business, v34, 394-419.
17 H.E.
Hurst, a British civil servant, is credited with bringing the power law distribution into popular usage.
Faced with the task of protecting Egypt against floods on the Nile rive, he did an exhaustive analysis of the frequency of high and low water marks at dozens of other rivers around the world.
He found that the range widened far more than would be predicted by the normal distribution.
In fact, he devised a measure, called the Hurst exponent, to capture the widening of the range; the Hurst exponent which has a value of 0.5 for the normal distribution had a value of 0.73 for the rivers that he studied.
In intuitive terms, his findings suggested that there were extended periods of rainfall that were better-than-expected and worse- than-expected that caused the widening of the ranges.
Mandelbrot’s awareness of this research allowed him to bring the same thinking into his analysis of cotton prices on the Commodity Exchange.he termed “wild randomness”.
Wild randomness occurs when a single observation can affect the population in a disproportionate way.
Stock and commodity prices, with their long periods of relatively small movements, punctuated by wild swings in both directions, seem to fit better into the “wild randomness” group.What are the consequences for risk measures? If asset prices follow power law

 distributions, the standard deviation or volatility ceases to be a good risk measure and a good basis for computing probabilities.
Assume, for instance, that the standard deviation in annual stock returns is 15% and that the average return is 10%.
Using the normal distribution as the base for probability predictions, this will imply that the stock returns will exceed 40% (average plus two standard deviations) only once every 44 years and 55% only (average plus three standard deviations) once every 740 years.
In fact, stock returns will be greater than 85% (average plus five standard deviations) only once every 3.5 million years.
In reality, stock returns exceed these values far more frequently, a finding consistent with power law distributions, where the probability of larger values decline linearly as a function of the power law exponent.
As the value gets doubled, the probability of its occurrence drops by the square of the exponent.
Thus, if the exponent in the distribution is 2, the likelihood of returns of 25%, 50% and 100% can be computed as follows:Returns will exceed 25%: Once every 6 yearsReturns will exceed 50%: Once every 24 yearsReturns will exceed 100%: Once every 96 years

 Note that as the returns get doubled, the likelihood increases four-fold (the square of the exponent).
As the exponent decreases, the likelihood of larger values increases; an exponent between 0 and 2 will yield extreme values more often than a normal distribution.
An exponent between 1 and 2 yields power law distributions called stable Paretian distributions, which have infinite variance.
In an early study, Fama18 estimated the exponent for stocks to be between 1.7 and 1.9, but subsequent studies have found that the exponent is higher in both equity and currency markets.1918 Fama, E.F., 1965, The Behavior of Stock Market Prices, Journal of Business, v38, 34-105.
19 In a paper in “Nature”, researchers looked at stock prices on 500 stocks between 1929 and 1987and concluded that the exponent for stock returns is roughly 3.
Gabaix, X., Gopikrishnan, P., Plerou, V.
&

 In practical terms, the power law proponents argue that using measures such as volatility (and its derivatives such as beta) under estimate the risk of large movements.
The power law exponents for assets, in their view, provide investors with more realistic risk measures for these assets.
Assets with higher exponents are less risky (since extreme values become less common) than asset with lower exponents.Mandelbrot’s challenge to the normal distribution was more than a procedural

 one.
Mandelbrot’s world, in contrast to the Gaussian mean-variance one, is one where prices move jaggedly over time and look like they have no pattern at a distance, but where patterns repeat themselves, when observed closely.
In the 1970s, Mandelbrot created a branch of mathematics called “fractal geometry” where processes are not described by conventional statistical or mathematical measures but by fractals; a fractal is a geometric shape that when broken down into smaller parts replicates that shape.
To illustrate the concept, he uses the example of the coastline that, from a distance, looks irregular but up close looks roughly the same – fractal patterns repeat themselves.
In fractal geometry, higher fractal dimensions translate into more jagged shapes; the rugged Cornish Coastline has a fractal dimension of 1.25 whereas the much smoother South African coastline has a fractal dimension of 1.02.
Using the same reasoning, stock prices that look random, when observed at longer time intervals, start revealing self-repeating patterns, when observed over shorter time periods.
More volatile stocks score higher on measures of fractal dimension, thus making it a measure of risk.
With fractal geometry, Mandelbrot was able to explain not only the higher frequency of price jumps (relative to the normal distribution) but also long periods where prices move in the same directionand the resulting price bubbles.20Intuitively, it should be downside risk that concerns us and not upside risk.
In other words, it is not investments that go up significantly that create heartburn and unease but investments that go down significantly.
The mean-variance framework, by weightingStanley, H.E., 2003, A theory of power law distributions in financial market fluctuations.
Nature 423, 267- 70.

 both upside volatility and downside movements equally, does not distinguish between the two.
With a normal or any other symmetric distribution, the distinction between upside and downside risk is irrelevant because the risks are equivalent.
With asymmetric distributions, though, there can be a difference between upside and downside risk.
As we noted in chapter 3, studies of risk aversion in humans conclude that (a) they are loss averse, i.e., they weigh the pain of a loss more than the joy of an equivalent gain and (b) they value very large positive payoffs – long shots – far more than they should given the likelihood of these payoffs.In practice, return distributions for stocks and most other assets are not symmetric.
Instead, as shown in figure 4.4, asset returns exhibit fat tails and are more likely to have extreme positive values than extreme negative values (simply because returns are constrained to be no less than -100%).Figure 4.4: Return distributions on Stocks

 Note that the distribution of stock returns has a higher incidence of extreme returns (fat tails or kurtosis) and a tilt towards very large positive returns (positive skewness).
Critics of the mean variance approach argue that it takes too narrow a view of both rewards and risk.
In their view, a fuller return measure should consider not just the magnitude of20 Mandelbrot has expanded on his thesis in a book on the topic: Mandelbrot, B.
and R.L.
Hudson, 2004, The (Mis)behavior of Markets: A Fractal View of Risk, Ruin and Reward, Basic Books.

 expected returns but also the likelihood of very large positive returns or skewness21 and more complete risk measure should incorporate both variance and possibility of big jumps (co-kurtosis).22 Note that even as these approaches deviate from the mean-variance approach in terms of how they define risk, they stay true to the portfolio measure of risk.
In other words, it is not the possibility of large positive payoffs (skewness) or big jumps (kurtosis) that they argue should be considered, but only that portion of the skewness (co- skewness) and kurtosis (co-kurtosis) that is market related and not diversifiable.The normal, power law and asymmetric distributions that form the basis for the models we have discussed in this section are all continuous distributions.
Observing the reality that stock prices do jump, there are some who have argued for the use of jump process distributions to derive risk measures.

 Press, in one of the earliest papers that attempted to model stock price jumps, argued that stock prices follow a combination of a continuous price distribution and a Poisson distribution, where prices jump at irregular intervals.
The key parameters of the Poisson distribution are the expected size of the price jump (µ), the variance in this value (δ2) and the likelihood of a price jump in any specified time period (λ) and Press estimated these values for ten stocks.
In subsequent papers, Beckers and Ball and Torous suggest ways of refining these estimates.23 In an attempt to bridge the gap between the CAPM and jump process models, Jarrow and Rosenfeld derive a version of the capital

 21 The earliest paper on this topic was by Kraus, Alan, and Robert H.
Litzenberger, 1976, Skewness preference and the valuation of risk assets, Journal of Finance 31, 1085-1100.
They generated a three- moment CAPM, with a measure of co-skewness (of the asset with the market) added to capture preferences for skewness, and argued that it helped better explain differences across stock returns.
In a more recent paper, Harvey, C.
and Siddique, A.
(2000).
Conditional skewness in asset pricing tests, Journal of Finance, 55, 1263-1295, use co-skewness to explain why small companies and low price to book companies earn higher returns 22 Fang, H.
and Lai T-Y.
(1997).
Co-kurtosis and capital asset pricing, The Financial Review, 32, 293-307.
In this paper, the authors introduce a measure of co-kurtosis (stock price jumps that are correlated with market jumps) and argue that it adds to the risk of a stock.
23 Beckers, S., 1981, A Note on Estimating the Parameters of the Diffusion- Jump Process Model of Stock Returns, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, v16, 127-140; Ball, C.A.
and W.N.
Torous, 1983, A Simplified Jump Process for Common Stock Returns, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, v18, 53-65.asset pricing model that includes a jump component that captures the likelihood of market jumps and an individual asset’s correlation with these jumps.
24

 While jump process models have gained some traction in option pricing, they have had limited success in equity markets, largely because the parameters of jump process models are difficult to estimate with any degree of precision.
Thus, while everyone agrees that stock prices jump, there is little consensus on the best way to measure how often this happens and whether these jumps are diversifiable and how best to incorporate their effect into risk measures.

 There have been two developments in the last three decades that have changed the way we think about risk measurement.
The first was access to richer data on stock and commodity market information; researchers could not only get information on weekly, daily or even intraday prices but also on trading volume and bid-ask spreads.
The other was the increase in both personal and mainframe computing power, allowing researchers to bring powerful statistical tools to bear on the data.
As a consequence of these two trends, we have seen the advent of risk measures that are based almost entirely on observed market prices and financial data.

 The first direct challenge to the capital asset pricing model came in the mid- seventies, when Steve Ross developed the arbitrage pricing model, using the fundamental proposition that two assets with the same exposure to risk had to be priced the same by the market to prevent investors from generating risk-free or arbitrage profits.25 In a market where arbitrage opportunities did not exist, he argued that you can back out measures of risk from observed market returns.
Appendix 3 provides a short summary of the derivation of the arbitrage pricing model.24 Jarrow, R.A.
and E.R.
Rosenfeld, 1984, Jump Risks and the Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model, Journal of Business, v 57, 337-351.
25 Ross, Stephen A., 1976, The Arbitrage Theory Of Capital Asset Pricing, Journal of Economic Theory, v13(3), 341-360.

 The statistical technique that Ross used to extract these risk measures was factor analysis.
He examined (or rather got a computer to analyze) returns on individual stocks over a very long time period and asked a fundamental question: Are there common factors that seem to cause large numbers of stock to move together in particular time periods? The factor analysis suggested that there were multiple factors affecting overall stock prices; these factors were termed market risk factors since they affected many stocks at the same time.
As a bonus, the factor analysis measured each stock’s exposure to each of the multiple factors; these measures were titled factor betas.

 In the parlance of the capital asset pricing model, the arbitrage pricing model replaces the single market risk factor in the CAPM (captured by the market portfolio) with multiple market risk factors, and the single market beta in the CAPM (which measures risk added by an individual asset to the market portfolio) with multiple factor betas (measuring an asset’s exposure to each of the individual market risk factors).
More importantly, the arbitrage pricing model does not make restrictive assumptions about investor utility functions or the return distributions of assets.
The tradeoff, though, is that the arbitrage pricing model does depend heavily on historical price data for its estimates of both the number of factors and factor betas and is at its core more of a statistical than an economic model.

 While arbitrage pricing models restrict themselves to historical price data, multi- factor models expand the data used to include macro-economic data in some versions and firm-specific data (such as market capitalization and pricing ratios) in others.
Fundamentally, multi-factor models begin with the assumption that market prices usually go up or down for good reason, and that stocks that earn high returns over long periods must be riskier than stocks that earn low returns over the same periods.
With that assumption in place, these models then look for external data that can explain the differences in returns across stocks.One class of multi factor models restrict the external data that they use to macroeconomic data, arguing that the risk that is priced into stocks should be market risk and not firm-specific risk.
For instance, Chen, Roll, and Ross suggest that the following

 macroeconomic variables are highly correlated with the factors that come out of factor analysis: the level of industrial production, changes in the default spread (between corporate and treasury bonds), shifts in the yield curve (captured by the difference between long and short term rates), unanticipated inflation, and changes in the real rate of return.26 These variables can then be correlated with returns to come up with a model of expected returns, with firm-specific betas calculated relative to each variable.
In summary, Chen, Roll and Ross found that stock returns were more negative in periods when industrial production fell and the default spread, unanticipated inflation and the real rate of return increased.
Stocks did much better in periods when the yield curve was more upward sloping – long term rates were higher than short term rates – and worse in periods when the yield curve was flat or downward sloping.
With this approach, the measure of risk for a stock or asset becomes its exposure to each of these macroeconomic factors (captured by the beta relative to each factor).

 While multi-factor models may stretch the notion of market risk, they remain true to its essence by restricting the search to only macro economic variables.
A second class of models weakens this restriction by widening the search for variables that explain differences in stock returns to include firm-specific factors.
The most widely cited study using this approach was by Fama and French where they presented strong evidence that differences in returns across stocks between 1962 and 1990 were best explained not by CAPM betas but by two firm-specific measures: the market capitalization of a company and its book to price ratio.27 Smaller market cap companies and companies with higher book to price ratios generated higher annual returns over this period than larger market cap companies with lower book to price ratios.
If markets are reasonably efficient in the long term, they argued that this must indicate that market capitalization and book to price ratios were good stand-ins or proxies for risk measures.
In the years since, other factors

 26 Chen, N., R.
Roll and S.A.
Ross, 1986, Economic Forces and the Stock Market, Journal of Business, 1986, v59, 383-404.
27 Fama, E.F.
and K.R.
French, 1992, The Cross-Section of Expected Returns, Journal of Finance, v47, 427-466.
There were numerous other studies prior to this one that had the same conclusions as this one but their focus was different.
These earlier studies uses their findings that low PE, low PBV and small companies earned higher returns than expected (based on the CAPM) to conclude that either markets were not efficient or that the CAPM did not work.have added to the list of risk proxies – price momentum, price level per share and liquidity are a few that come to mind.28

 Multi-factor and proxy models will do better than conventional asset pricing models in explaining differences in returns because the variables chosen in these models are those that have the highest correlation with returns.
Put another way, researchers can search through hundreds of potential proxies and pick the ones that work best.
It is therefore unfair to argue for these models based purely upon their better explanatory power.

 The way in which we measure risk has evolved over time, reflecting in part the developments in statistics and economics on the one hand and the availability of data on the other.
In figure 4.5, we summarize the key developments in the measurement of risk and the evolution of risk measures over time:28 Stocks that have gone up strongly in the recent past (his momentum), trade at low prices per share and are less liquid earn higher returns than stocks without these characteristics.Figure 4.5: Key Developments in Risk Analysis and Evolution of Risk MeasuresKey EventRisk Measure usedRisk was considered to be either fated and thus impossible to change or divine providence in which case it could be altered onlyor gutIt is worth noting that as new risk measures have evolved, the old ones have not been entirely abandoned.
Thus, while much of academic research may have jumped on theportfolio theory bandwagon and its subsequent refinements, there are still many investors who are more comfortable with subjective judgments about risk or overall risk categories (stocks are risky and bonds are not).

 To manage risk, we first have to measure it.
In this chapter, we look at the evolution of risk measures over time.
For much of recorded time, human beings attributed negative events to fate or divine providence and therefore made little effort to measure it quantitatively.
After all, if the gods have decided to punish you, no risk measurement device or risk management product can protect you from retribution.

 The first break in this karmic view of risk occurred in the middle ages when mathematicians, more in the interests of success at the card tables than in risk measurement, came up with the first measures of probability.
Subsequent advances in statistics – sampling distributions, the law of large numbers and Bayes’ rule, to provide three examples – extended the reach of probability into the uncertainties that individuals and businesses faced day to day.
As a consequence, the insurance business was born, where companies offered to protect individuals and businesses from expected losses by charging premiums.
The key, though, was that risk was still perceived almost entirely in terms of potential downside and losses.

 The growth of markets for financial assets created a need for risk measures that captured both the downside risk inherent in these investments as well as the potential for upside or profits.
The growth of services that provided estimates of these risk measures parallels the growth in access to pricing and financial data on investments.
The bond rating agencies in the early part of the twentieth century provided risk measures for corporate bonds.
Measures of equity risk appeared at about the same time but were primarily centered on price volatility and financial ratios.

 While the virtues of diversifying across investments had been well publicized at the time of his arrival, Markowitz laid the foundation for modern portfolio theory by making explicit the benefits of diversification.
In the aftermath of his derivation of efficient portfolios, i.e.
portfolios that maximized expected returns for given variances, three classes of models that allowed for more detailed risk measures developed.
One class

 included models like the CAPM that stayed true to the mean variance framework and measured risk for any asset as the variance added on to a diversified portfolio.
The second set of models relaxed the normal distribution assumption inherent in the CAPM and allowed for more general distributions (like the power law and asymmetric distributions) and the risk measures emanating from these distributions.
The third set of models trusted the market to get it right, at least on average, and derived risk measures by looking at past history.
Implicitly, these models assumed that investments that have earned high returns in the past must have done so because they were riskier and looked for factors that best explain these returns.
These factors remained unnamed and were statistical in the arbitrage pricing model, were macro economic variables in multi factor models and firm-specific measures (like market cap and price to book ratios) in proxy models.

 Consider a portfolio of two assets.
Asset A has an expected return of µA and a variance in returns of σ2 A, while asset B has an expected return of µB and a variance in returns of σ2 B.
The correlation in returns between the two assets, which measures how the assets move together, is ρAB.
The expected returns and variance of a two-asset portfolio can be written as a function of these inputs and the proportion of the portfolio going to each asset.µportfolio = wA µA + (1 - wA) µBσ2 portfolio = wA 2 σ2 A + (1 - wA)2 σ2 B + 2 wA wB ρΑΒ σA σBwherewA = Proportion of the portfolio in asset AThe last term in the variance formulation is sometimes written in terms of the covariance in returns between the two assets, which isThe savings that accrue from diversification are a function of the correlation coefficient.
Other things remaining equal, the higher the correlation in returns between the two assets, the smaller are the potential benefits from diversification.
The following example illustrates the savings from diversification.

 If there is a diversification benefit of going from one asset to two, as the preceding discussion illustrates, there must be a benefit in going from two assets to three, and from three assets to more.
The variance of a portfolio of three assets can be written as a function of the variances of each of the three assets, the portfolio weights on each and the correlations between pairs of the assets.
It can be written as follows -σp 2= wA 2 σ2 A + wB 2 σ2 B + wC 2 σ2 C+ 2 wA wB ρAB σA σB+ 2 wA wC ρAC σA σC+ 2 wB wC ρBC σB σCwherewA,wB,wC = Portfolio weights on assetsσ207, ,02B ,02c = Variances of assets A, B, and CNote that the number of covariance terms in the variance formulation has increased fromone to three.
This formulation can be extended to the more general case of a portfolio of n assets:The number of terms in this formulation increases exponentially with the number of assets in the portfolio, largely because of the number of covariance terms that have to be considered.
In general, the number of covariance terms can be written as a function of the number of assets:Number of covariance terms = n (n-1) /2where n is the number of assets in the portfolio.
Table 4A.1 lists the number of covariance terms we would need to estimate the variances of portfolios of different sizes.

 This formulation can be used to estimate the variance of a portfolio and the effects of diversification on that variance.
For purposes of simplicity, assume that the average asset has a standard deviation in returns of and that the average covariance in returns between any pair of assets is .
Furthermore, assume that the portfolio is always equally weighted across the assets in that portfolio.
The variance of a portfolio of n assets can then be written as

 The fact that variances can be estimated for portfolios made up of a large number of assets suggests an approach to optimizing portfolio construction, in which investors trade off expected return and variance.
If an investor can specify the maximum amount of risk he is willing to take on (in terms of variance), the task of portfolio optimization becomes the maximization of expected returns subject to this level of risk.
Alternatively, if an investor specifies her desired level of return, the optimum portfolio is the one thatminimizes the variance subject to this level of return.
These optimization algorithms can be written as follows.Return MaximizationMaximize Expected Return= Investor's desired level of variance= Investor's desired expected returns

 The portfolios that emerge from this process are called Markowitz portfolios.
They are considered efficient, because they maximize expected returns given the standard deviation, and the entire set of portfolios is referred to as the Efficient Frontier.
Graphically, these portfolios are shown on the expected return/standard deviation dimensions in figure 4A.1 -Figure 4A.1: Markowitz Portfolios

 The Markowitz approach to portfolio optimization, while intuitively appealing, suffers from two major problems.
The first is that it requires a very large number of inputs, since the covariances between pairs of assets are required to estimate the variances of portfolios.
While this may be manageable for small numbers of assets, it becomes less so when the entire universe of stocks or all investments is considered.
The second problemis that the Markowitz approach ignores a very important asset choice that most investors have -- riskless default free government securities -- in coming up with optimum portfolios.

 To get from Markowitz portfolios to the capital asset pricing model, let us considering adding a riskless asset to the mix of risky assets.
By itself, the addition of one asset to the investment universe may seem trivial, but the riskless asset has some special characteristics that affect optimal portfolio choice for all investors.(1) The riskless asset, by definition, has an expected return that will always be equal to the actual return.
The expected return is known when the investment is made, and the actual return should be equal to this expected return; the standard deviation in returns on this investment is zero.

 (2) While risky assets’ returns vary, the absence of variance in the riskless asset’s returns make it uncorrelated with returns on any of these risky assets.
To examine what happens to the variance of a portfolio that combines a riskless asset with a risky portfolio, assume that the variance of the risky portfolio is σr2 and that wr is the proportion of the overall portfolio invested to these risky assets.
The balance is invested in a riskless asset, which has no variance, and is uncorrelated with the risky asset.
The variance of the overall portfolio can be written as:σ2 portfolio = wr 2 σ2 rrσportfolio = wrσrNote that the other two terms in the two-asset variance equation drop out, and the standard deviation of the overall portfolio is a linear function of the portfolio invested in the risky portfolio.The significance of this result can be illustrated by returning to figure 4A.1 and adding the riskless asset to the choices available to the investor.
The effect of this addition is explored in figure 4A.2.

 In a world in which investors hold a combination of only two assets -- the riskless asset and the market portfolio -- the risk of any individual asset will be measured relative to the market portfolio.
In particular, the risk of any asset will be the risk it adds on to the market portfolio.
To arrive at the appropriate measure of this added risk, assume that σ2 m is the variance of the market portfolio prior to the addition of the new asset, and that the variance of the individual asset being added to this portfolio is σ2 i.
The market value portfolio weight on this asset is wi, and the covariance in returns between the individualasset and the market portfolio is σim.
The variance of the market portfolio prior to and after the addition of the individual asset can then be written asVariance prior to asset i being added = σ2mVariance after asset i is added = σ2 m' = wi 2 σ2 + (1 - wi)2 σ2 i m + 2 wi (1-wi) σim

 The market value weight on any individual asset in the market portfolio should be small since the market portfolio includes all traded assets in the economy.
Consequently, the first term in the equation should approach zero, and the second term should approach σ2 m, leaving the third term (σim, the covariance) as the measure of the risk added by asset i.
Dividing this term by the variance of the market portfolio yields the beta of an asset:Beta of asset =

 Like the capital asset pricing model, the arbitrage pricing model begins by breaking risk down into firm-specific and market risk components.
As in the capital asset pricing model, firm specific risk covers information that affects primarily the firm whereas market risk affects many or all firms.
Incorporating both types of risk into a return model, we get:

 where R is the actual return, E(R) is the expected return, m is the market-wide component of unanticipated risk and ε is the firm-specific component.
Thus, the actual return can be different from the expected return, either because of market risk or firm-specific actions.
In general, the market component of unanticipated returns can be decomposed into economic factors:whereβj =Note that the measure of an investment’s sensitivity to any macro-economic factor takes the form of a beta, called a factor beta.
In fact, this beta has many of the same properties as the market beta in the CAPM.

 The arbitrage pricing model assumes that firm-specific risk component (ε) is can be diversified away and concludes that the return on a portfolio will not have a firm- specific component of unanticipated returns.
The return on a portfolio can be written as the sum of two weighted averages -that of the anticipated returns in the portfolio and that of the market factors:= (w1R1+w2R2+...+wnRn)+ (w1β1,1+w2β1,2+...+wnβ1,n) F1 +(w1β2,1+w2β2,2+...+wnβ2,n) F2 .....where,βi,j= Beta on factor i for asset j

 The final step in this process is estimating an expected return as a function of the betas specified above.
To do this, we should first note that the beta of a portfolio is the weighted average of the betas of the assets in the portfolio.
This property, in conjunction with the absence of arbitrage, leads to the conclusion that expected returns should be linearly related to betas.
To see why, assume that there is only one factor and three portfolios.
Portfolio A has a beta of 2.0 and an expected return on 20%; portfolio B has a beta of 1.0 and an expected return of 12%; and portfolio C has a beta of 1.5 and an expected return on 14%.
Note that the investor can put half of his wealth in portfolio A and half in portfolio B and end up with a portfolio with a beta of 1.5 and an expected return of 16%.
Consequently no investor will choose to hold portfolio C until the prices of assets in that portfolio drop and the expected return increases to 16%.
By the same rationale, the expected returns on every portfolio should be a linear function of the beta.
If they were not, we could combine two other portfolios, one with a higher beta and one with a lower beta, to earn a higher return than the portfolio in question, creating an opportunity for arbitrage.
This argument can be extended to multiple factors with the same results.
Therefore, the expected return on an asset can be written asE(R) = Rf + β1 [E(R1)-Rf] + β2 [E(R2)-Rf] ...+ βn [E(Rn)-Rf]whereRf = Expected return on a zero-beta portfolioE(Rj) = Expected return on a portfolio with a factor beta of 1 for factor j, and zerofor all other factors.The terms in the brackets can be considered to be risk premiums for each of the factors in the model.

 Risk-averse investors will assign lower values to assets that have more risk associated with them than to otherwise similar assets that are less risky.
The most common way of adjusting for risk to compute a value that is risk adjusted.
In this chapter, we will consider four ways in which we this risk adjustment can be made.
The first two approaches are based upon discounted cash flow valuation, where we value an asset by discounting the expected cash flows on it at a discount rate.
The risk adjustment here can take the form of a higher discount rate or as a reduction in expected cash flows for risky assets, with the adjustment based upon some measure of asset risk.
The third approach is to do a post-valuation adjustment to the value obtained for an asset, with no consideration given for risk, with the adjustment taking the form of a discount for potential downside risk or a premium for upside risk.
In the final approach, we adjust for risk by observing how much the market discounts the value of assets of similar risk.

 While we will present these approaches as separate and potentially self-standing, we will also argue that analysts often employ combinations of approaches.
For instance, it is not uncommon for an analyst to estimate value using a risk-adjusted discount rate and then attach an additional discount for liquidity to that value.
In the process, they often double count or miscount risk.

 In discounted cash flow valuation, the value of any asset can be written as the present value of the expected cash flows on that asset.
Thus, the value of a default free government bond is the present value of the coupons on the bond, discounted back at a riskless rate.
As we introduce risk into the cash flows, we face a choice of how best to reflect this risk.
We can continue to use the same expected cash flows that a risk-neutral investor would have used and add a risk premium to the riskfree rate to arrive at a risk- adjusted discount rate to use in discounting the cash flows.
Alternatively, we can continue to use the risk free rate as the discount rate and adjust the expected cash flowsfor risk; in effect, we replace the uncertain expected cash flows with certainty equivalent cash flows.

 We buy most assets because we expect them to generate cash flows for us in the future.
In discounted cash flow valuation, we begin with a simple proposition.
The value of an asset is not what someone perceives it to be worth but is a function of the expected cash flows on that asset.
Put simply, assets with predictable cash flows should have higher values than assets with volatile cash flows.
There are two ways in which we can value assets with risk:where the asset has a n-year life, E(CFt) is the expected cash flow in period t and r is a discount rate that reflects the risk of the cash flows.where CE(CFt) is the certainty equivalent of E(CFt) and rf is the riskfree rate.
The cashflows will vary from asset to asset -- dividends for stocks, coupons (interest) and the face value for bonds and after-tax cashflows for a investment made by a business.
The principles of valuation do not.

 Using discounted cash flow models is in some sense an act of faith.
We believe that every asset has an intrinsic value and we try to estimate that intrinsic value by looking at an asset’s fundamentals.
What is intrinsic value? Consider it the value that would be attached to an asset by an all-knowing analyst with access to all information available right now and a perfect valuation model.
No such analyst exists, of course, but we all aspire to be as close as we can to this perfect analyst.
The problem lies in the factthat none of us ever gets to see what the true intrinsic value of an asset is and we therefore have no way of knowing whether our discounted cash flow valuations are close to the mark or not.Of the two approaches for adjusting for risk in discounted cash flow valuation, the more common one is the risk adjusted discount rate approach, where we use higher discount rates to discount expected cash flows when valuing riskier assets, and lower discount rates when valuing safer assets.Risk and Return Models

 In the last chapter, we examined the development of risk and return models in economics and finance.
From the capital asset pricing model in 1964 to the multi-factor models of today, a key output from these models is the expected rate of return for an investment, given its risk.
This expected rate of return is the risk-adjusted discount rate for the asset’s cash flows.
In this section, we will revisit the capital asset pricing model, the arbitrage-pricing model and the multi-factor model and examine the inputs we need to compute the required rate of return with each one.In the capital asset pricing model, the expected return on an asset is a function of its beta, relative to the market portfolio.

 Expected Return = Riskfree Rate + Market Beta * Equity Risk Premium There are two inputs that all assets have in common in risk and return models.
The first is the riskfree rate, which is the rate of return that you can expect to make with certainty on an investment.
This is usually measured as the current market interest rate on a default- free (usually Government) security; the U.S.
Treasury bond rate or bill rate is used as the long term or short-term riskfree rate in U.S.
dollars.
It is worth noting that the riskfree rate will vary across currencies, since the expected inflation rate is different with each currency.
The second is the equity risk premium, which can be estimated in one of two ways.
The first is a historical risk premium, obtained by looking at returns you would have earned on stocks, relative to a riskless investment, and the other is to compute a forward-looking or implied premium by looking at the pricing of stocks, relative to the

 cash flows you expect to get from investing in them.
In chapter 3, we estimated both for the U.S.
market and came up with 4.80% for the former and 4.09% for the latter in early 2006, relative to the treasury bond rate.
The only risk parameter that is investment- specific is the beta, which measures the covariance of the investment with the market portfolio.
In practice, it is estimated by other regressing returns on the investment (if it is publicly traded) against returns on a market index, or by looking at the betas of other publicly traded firms in the same business.
The latter is called a bottom-up beta and generally yields more reliable estimates than a historical regression beta, which, in addition to being backward looking, also yields betas with large error terms.
Appendix 5.1 provides a more detailed description of the steps involved in computing bottom-up betas.

 Consider a simple example.
In January 2006, the ten-year treasury bond rate in the United States was 4.25%.
At that time, the regression beta for Google was 1.83, with a standard error of 0.35, and the bottom-up beta for Google, looking at other internet firms was 2.25.
If we accept the latter as the best estimate of the beta, the expected return on Google stock, using the implied risk premium of 4.09%, would have been:Expected return on Google = 4.25% + 2.25 (4.09%) = 13.45%If you were valuing Google’s equity cash flows, this would have been the risk adjusted discount rate that you would have used.1

 The arbitrage pricing and multi-factor models are natural extensions of the capital asset pricing model.
The riskfree rate remains unchanged, but risk premiums now have to be estimated for each factor; the premiums are for the unspecified market risk factors in the arbitrage pricing model and for the specified macro economic risk factors in the multi-factor models.
For individual investments, the betas have to be estimated, relative to each factor, and as with the CAPM betas, they can come from examining historical returns data on each investment or by looking at betas that are typical for the business that the investment is in.

 1 When firms are funded with a mix of equity and debt, we can compute a consolidated cost of capital that is weighted average of the cost of equity (computed using a risk and return model) and a cost of debt (based upon the default risk of the firm).
To value the entire business (rather than just the equity), we would discount the collective cashflows generated by the business for its equity investors and lenders at the cost of capital.

 As we noted in chapter 4, the risk and return models in use share the common assumption of a marginal investor who is well diversified and measure risk as the risk added on to a diversified portfolio.
They also share a common weakness insofar as they make simplifying assumptions about investor behavior – that investors have quadratic utility functions, for instance- or return distributions – that returns are log-normally distributed.
They do represent a convenient way of adjusting for risk and it is no surprise that they are in the toolboxes of most analysts who deal with risky investments.Proxy Models

 In chapter 4, we examined some of the variables that have historically characterized stocks that have earned high returns: small market capitalization and low price to book ratios are two that come to mind.
We also highlighted the findings of Fama and French, who regressed returns on stocks against these variables, using data from 1963 to 1990, to arrive at the following result for monthly returns:whereReturnj = Monthly Return on company jln(MVj) = Natural log of the Market Value of Equity of company j

 ln(BV/MV) = Natural log of ratio of Book Value to Market Value of Equity Plugging in a company’s market value and book to price ratio into this equation will generate an expected return for that investment, which, in turn, is an estimate of the risk- adjusted discount rate that you could use to value it.
Thus, the expected monthly return for a company with a market value of equity of $ 500 million and a book value of equity of $ 300 million can be written as:Expected Monthly Return = 1.77% -0.11 ln(500) + 0.35 ln (300/500) = 0.9076% Annualized, this would translate into an expected annual return of 11.45%:Expected Annual Return = (1.009076)12-1 = .1145 or 11.45%This would be the risk-adjusted discount rate that you would use the value the company’s cash flows (to equity investors).In recent years, there have been other variables that have been added to proxy models.
Adding price momentum, price level and trading volume have been shown toimprove the predictive power of the regression; strong stock price performance in the last six months, low stock price levels and low trading volume are leading indicators of high returns in the future.

 Proxy models have developed a following among analysts, especially those whose primary focus is valuing companies.
Many of these analysts use an amalgam of risk and return models and proxy models to generate risk-adjusted discount rates to use in valuing stocks; for instance, the CAPM will be used to estimate an expected return for a small company and a small-stock premium (usually based upon historical return premium earned by small stocks relative to the market index) is added on to arrive at the “”right” discount rate for a small company.
The approach has been less useful for those who are called upon to analyze either real or non-traded investments, since the inputs to the model (market capitalization and price to book ratio) require a market price.Implied Discount Rates

 For assets that are traded in the market, there is a third approach that can be used to estimate discount rates.
If we are willing to make estimates of the expected cash flows on the asset, the risk-adjusted discount rate can be backed out of the market price.
Thus, if an asset has a market value of $ 1000, expected cash flow next year of $100 and a predicted growth rate of 3% in perpetuity, the risk-adjusted discount rate implied in the price can be computed as follows:Market Value = Expected cash flow next year/ (Risk adjusted Discount Rate – Growth)1000 = 100/(r - .03)Solving for r, we obtain a risk-adjusted discount rate of 13%.While the implied discount rate does away with the requirements of making assumptions about investor utility and return distributions of the risk and return models, and the dependence on historical patterns underlying the proxy models, it has two critical flaws that have prevented its general usage:judgment on whether the market price is correct; put another way, using the implied discount rate to value any risky asset will yield the not surprising conclusion that everything is always fairly priced.

 There are interesting ways in which practitioners have got around these problems.
One is to compute implied risk adjusted discount rates for every asset in a class of risky assets – all cement companies, for example – and to average the rate across the assets.
Implicitly, we are assuming that the assets all have equivalent risk and that they should therefore all share the same average risk-adjusted rate of return.
The other is to compute risk-adjusted discount rates for the same asset for each year for a long period and to average the rate obtained over the period.
Here, the assumption is that the risk adjusted discount rate does not change over time and that the average across time is the best estimate of the risk adjusted rate today.General IssuesWhile the use of risk adjusted discount rates in computing value is widespread in both business valuation and capital budgeting, there are a surprising number of unresolved or overlooked issues in their usage.

 a.
Single period models and Multi period projects: The risk and return models that we usually draw upon for estimating discount rates such as the CAPM or the APM are single period models, insofar as they help you forecast expected returns for the next period.
Most assets have cash flows over multiple periods and we discount these cash flows at the single period discount rate, compounded over time.
In other words, when we estimate the risk-adjusted return at Google to be 13.45%, it is an expected return for the next year.
When valuing Google, we discount cash flows in years 2, 3 and beyond using the same discount rate.
Myers and Turnbull (1977) note that this is appropriate only if we assume that the systematic risk of the project (its beta in the CAPM) and the market risk premium do not change over time.2 They also go on to argue that this assumption will be violated when a business or asset has growth potential, since the systematic risk (beta) of growth is likely to be higher than the systematic risk of investments already made and that this2 Myers, S.C.
and S.M.
Turnbull, 1977, Capital Budgeting and the Capital Asset Pricing Model: Good News and Bad New, Journal of Finance, v32, 321-333.will cause the systematic risk of an asset to change over time.
One approximation worth considering in this scenario is to change the risk-adjusted discount rate each period to reflect changes in the systematic risk.

 b.
Composite Discount Rate versus Item-specific discount rate: In most discounted cash flow valuations, we estimate the expected cash flows of the asset by netting all outflows against inflows and then discount these cash flows using one risk adjusted cost of capital.
Implicitly, we are assuming that all cash flow items have equivalent exposure to systematic risk, but what if this assumption is not true? We could use different risk- adjusted discount rates for each set of cash flows; for instance, revenues and variable operating expenses can be discounted at the cost of capital whereas fixed operating expenses, where the firm may have pre-committed to making the payments, can be discounted back at a lower rate (such as the cost of debt).
The question, though, is whether the risk differences are large enough to make a difference.
At the minimum, the one or two cash flow items that diverge most from the average risk assumption (underlying the risk adjusted cost of capital) can be separately valued.

 c.
Negative versus Positive Cash flows: Generally, we penalize riskier assets by increasing the discount rate that we use to discount the cash flows.
This pre-supposes that the cash flows are positive.
When cash flows are negative, using a higher discount rate will have the perverse impact of reducing their present value and perhaps increasing the aggregate value of the asset.
While some analysts get around this by discounting negative cash flows at the riskfree rate (or a low rate variant) and positive cash flows at the risk adjusted discount rate, they are being internally inconsistent in the way they deal with risk.
In our view, any value benefits that accrue from discounting negative cash flows at the risk adjusted rate will be more than lost when the eventual positive cash flows are discounted back at the same risk adjusted rate, compounded over time.
Consider, for instance, a growth business with negative cash flows of $ 10 million each year for the first 3 years and a terminal value of $ 100 million at the end of the third year.
Assume that the riskfree rate is 4% and the risk-adjusted discount rate is 10%.
The value of the firm using the riskfree rate for the first 3 years and the risk-adjusted rate only on theterminal value is as follows:Note that the terminal value is being discounted back at the riskfree rate for 3 years.3 In contrast, the value of the same firm using the risk-adjusted discount rate on all of the cash flows is as follows:Put another way, it is reasonable to discount back negative cash flows at a lower rate, if they are more predictable and stable, but not just because they are negative.

 While most analysts adjust the discount rate for risk in DCF valuation, there are some who prefer to adjust the expected cash flows for risk.
In the process, they are replacing the uncertain expected cash flows with the certainty equivalent cashflows, using a risk adjustment process akin to the one used to adjust discount rates.Misunderstanding Risk Adjustment

 At the outset of this section, it should be emphasized that many analysts misunderstand what risk adjusting the cash flows requires them to do.
There are analysts who consider the cash flows of an asset under a variety of scenarios, ranging from best case to catastrophic, assign probabilities to each one, take an expected value of the cash flows and consider it risk adjusted.
While it is true that bad outcomes have been weighted in to arrive at this cash flow, it is still an expected cash flow and is not risk adjusted.
To see why, assume that you were given a choice between two alternatives.
In the first one, you are offered $ 95 with certainty and in the second, you will receive $ 100 with probability 90% and only $50 the rest of the time.
The expected values of both alternatives is $95 but risk averse investors would pick the first investment with guaranteed cash flows over the second one.If this argument sounds familiar, it is because it is a throwback to the very beginnings of utility theory and the St.
Petersburg paradox that we examined in chapter 2.

 In that chapter, we unveiled the notion of a certainty equivalent, a guaranteed cash flow that we would accept instead of an uncertain cash flow and argued that more risk averse investors would settle for lower certainty equivalents for a given set of uncertain cash flows than less risk averse investors.
In the example given in the last paragraph, a risk averse investor would have settled for a guaranteed cash flow of well below $95 for the second alternative with an expected cash flow of $95.The practical question that we will address in this section is how best to convert uncertain expected cash flows into guaranteed certainty equivalents.
While we do not disagree with the notion that it should be a function of risk aversion, the estimation challenges remain daunting.Utility Models: Bernoulli revisited

 In chapter 2, we introduced the first (and oldest) approach to computing certainty equivalents, rooted in the utility functions for individuals.
If we can specify the utility function of wealth for an individual, we are well set to convert risky cash flows to certainty equivalents for that individual.
For instance, an individual with a log utility function would have demanded a certainty equivalent of $79.43 for the risky gamble presented in the last section (90% chance of $ 100 and 10% chance of $ 50):Certainty Equivalent = exp4.5359 = $93.30The certainty equivalent of $93.30 delivers the same utility as the uncertain gamble with an expected value of $95.
This process can be repeated for more complicated assets, and each expected cash flow can be converted into a certainty equivalent.4

 One quirk of using utility models to estimate certainty equivalents is that the certainty equivalent of a positive expected cash flow can be negative.
Consider, for instance, an investment where you can make $ 2000 with probability 50% and lose $ 1500 with probability 50%.
The expected value of this investment is $ 250 but the

 3 There are some who use the risk adjusted rate only on the terminal value but that would be patently unfair since you would be using two different discount rates for the same time periods.
The only exception would be if the negative cash flows were guaranteed and the terminal value was uncertain.
4 Gregory, D.D., 1978, Multiplicative Risk Premiums, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, v13, 947-963.
This paper derives certainty equivalent functions for quadratic, exponential and gamma distributed utility functions and examines their behavior.certainty equivalent may very well be negative, with the effect depending upon the utility function assumed.

 There are two problems with using this approach in practice.
The first is that specifying a utility function for an individual or analyst is very difficult, if not impossible, to do with any degree of precision.
In fact, as we noted in chapter 3, most utility functions that are well behaved (mathematically) do not seem to explain actual behavior very well.
The second is that, even if we were able to specify a utility function, this approach requires us to lay out all of the scenarios that can unfold for an asset (with corresponding probabilities) for every time period.
Not surprisingly, certainty equivalents from utility functions have been largely restricted to analyzing simple gambles in classrooms.Risk and Return Models

 A more practical approach to converting uncertain cash flows into certainty equivalents is offered by risk and return models.
In fact, we would use the same approach to estimating risk premiums that we employed while computing risk adjusted discount rates but we would use the premiums to estimate certainty equivalents instead.Certainty Equivalent Cash flow = Expected Cash flow/ (1 + Risk Premium in Risk-adjusted Discount Rate)Consider the risk-adjusted discount rate of 13.45% that we estimated for Google in earlyExpected return on Google = 4.25% + 2.25 (4.09%) = 13.45%Instead of discounting the expected cash flows on the stock at 13.45%, we would decompose the expected return into a risk free rate of 4.25% and a compounded riskpremium of 8.825%.5Compounded Risk Premium =If the expected cash flow in years 1 and 2 are $ 100 million and $ 120 million respectively, we can compute the certainty equivalent cash flows in those years:5 A more common approximation used by many analysts is the difference between the risk adjusted discount rate and the risk free rate.
In this case, that would have yielded a risk premium of 9.2% (13.45% - 4.25% = 9.20%)

 Certainty Equivalent Cash flow in year 1 = $ 100 million/1.08825 = $ 91.89 million Certainty Equivalent Cash flow in year 2 = $120 million/ 1.088252 = $ 101.33 million This process would be repeated for all of the expected cash flows and it has two effects.
Formally, the adjustment process for certainty equivalents can be then written more formally as follows (where the risk adjusted return is r and the riskfree rate is rf:6

 This adjustment has two effects.
The first is that expected cash flows with higher uncertainty associated with them have lower certainty equivalents than more predictable cash flows at the same point in time.
The second is that the effect of uncertainty compounds over time, making the certainty equivalents of uncertain cash flows further into the future lower than uncertain cash flows that will occur sooner.Cashflow Haircuts

 A far more common approach to adjusting cash flows for uncertainty is to “haircut” the uncertain cash flows subjectively.
Thus, an analyst, faced with uncertainty, will replace uncertain cash flows with conservative or lowball estimates.
This is a weapon commonly employed by analysts, who are forced to use the same discount rate for projects of different risk levels, and want to even the playing field.
They will haircut the cash flows of riskier projects to make them lower, thus hoping to compensate for the failure to adjust the discount rate for the additional risk.

 In a variant of this approach, there are some investors who will consider only those cashflows on an asset that are predictable and ignore risky or speculative cash flows when valuing the asset.
When Warren Buffet expresses his disdain for the CAPM and other risk and return models and claims to use the riskfree rate as the discount rate, we suspect that he can get away with doing so because of a combination of the types of companies he chooses to invest in and his inherent conservatism when it comes to estimating the cash flows.6 This equation was first derived in a paper in 1966: Robichek, A.A.
and S.
C.
Myers, 1966, Conceptual Problems in the Use of Risk Adjusted Discount Rates, Journal of Finance, v21, 727-730.

 While cash flow haircuts retain their intuitive appeal, we should be wary of their usage.
After all, gut feelings about risk can vary widely across analysts looking at the same asset; more risk averse analysts will tend to haircut the cashflows on the same asset more than less risk averse analysts.
Furthermore, the distinction we drew between diversifiable and market risk that we drew in the last chapter can be completely lost when analysts are making intuitive adjustments for risk.
In other words, the cash flows may be adjusted downwards for risk that will be eliminated in a portfolio.
The absence of transparency about the risk adjustment can also lead to the double counting of risk, especially when the analysis passes through multiple layers of analysis.
To provide an illustration, after the first analyst looking at a risky investment decides to use conservative estimates of the cash flows, the analysis may pass to a second stage, where his superior may decide to make an additional risk adjustment to the cash flows.Risk Adjusted Discount Rate or Certainty Equivalent Cash Flow

 Adjusting the discount rate for risk or replacing uncertain expected cash flows with certainty equivalents are alternative approaches to adjusting for risk, but do they yield different values, and if so, which one is more precise? The answer lies in how we compute certainty equivalents.
If we use the risk premiums from risk and return models to compute certainty equivalents, the values obtained from the two approaches will be the same.
After all, adjusting the cash flow, using the certainty equivalent, and then discounting the cash flow at the riskfree rate is equivalent to discounting the cash flow at a risk adjusted discount rate.
To see this, consider an asset with a single cash flow in one year and assume that r is the risk-adjusted cash flow, rf is the riskfree rate and RP is the compounded risk premium computed as described earlier in this section.This analysis can be extended to multiple time periods and will still hold.7 Note, though, that if the approximation for the risk premium, computed as the difference between the risk-adjusted return and the risk free rate, had been used, this equivalence will no longerhold.
In that case, the certainty equivalent approach will give lower values for any risky asset and the difference will increase with the size of the risk premium.

 Are there other scenarios where the two approaches will yield different values for the same risky asset? The first is when the risk free rates and risk premiums change from time period to time period; the risk-adjusted discount rate will also then change from period to period.
Robichek and Myers, in the paper we referenced earlier, argue that the certainty equivalent approach yields more precise estimates of value in this case.
The other is when the certainty equivalents are computed from utility functions or subjectively, whereas the risk adjusted discount rate comes from a risk and return model.
The two approaches can yield different estimates of value for a risky asset.
Finally, the two approaches deal with negative cash flows differently.
The risk adjusted discount rate discounts negative cash flows at a higher rate and the present value becomes less negative as the risk increases.
If certainty equivalents are computed from utility functions, they can yield certainty equivalents that are negative and become more negative as you increase risk, a finding that is more consistent with intuition.8

 Risk-adjusted discount rates and certainty equivalents come with pluses and minuses.
For some market-wide risks, such as exposure to interest rates, economic growth and inflation, it is often easier to estimate the parameters for a risk and return model and the risk adjusted discount rate.
For other risks, especially those occur infrequently but can have a large impact on value, it may be easier to adjust the expected cash flows.
Consider, for instance, the risk that a company is exposed to from an investment in India, China or any other large emerging market.
In most periods, the investment will like an investment in a developed market but in some periods, there is the potential for major political and economic disruptions and consequent changes in value.

 7 The proposition that risk adjusted discount rates and certainty equivalents yield identical net present values is shown in the following paper: Stapleton, R.C., 1971, Portfolio Analysis, Stock Valuation and Capital Budgeting Decision Rules for Risky Projects, Journal of Finance, v26, 95-117.
8 Beedles, W.L., 1978, Evaluating Negative Benefits, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, v13, 173-176.

 While we can attempt to incorporate this risk into the discount rate,9 it may be easier to adjust the cash flows for this risk, especially if the possibility of insuring against this risk exists.
If so, the cost of buying insurance can be incorporated into the expenses, and the resulting cash flow is adjusted for the insured risk (but not against other risks).
An alternate approach to adjusting cash flows can be used if a risk is triggered by a specific contingency.
For instance, a gold mining company that will default on its debt if the gold price drops below $250 an ounce can either obtain or estimate the cost of a put option on gold, with a strike price of $250, and include the cost when computing cash flows.

 The biggest dangers arise when analysts use an amalgam of approaches, where the cash flows are adjusted partially for risk, usually subjectively and the discount rate is also adjusted for risk.
It is easy to double count risk in these cases and the risk adjustment to value often becomes difficult to decipher.
To prevent this from happening, it is best to first categorize the risks that a project faces and to then be explicit about how the risk will be adjusted for in the analysis.
In the most general terms, risks can then be categorized as follows in table 5.1.9 Damodaran, A., 2002, Investment Valuation, John Wiley and Sons.
Several approaches for adjusting discount rates for country risk are presented in this book.

 We will use a simple example to illustrate the risk-adjusted discount rate, the certainty equivalent and the hybrid approaches.
Assume that Disney is considering investing in a new theme park in Thailand and that table 5.2 contains the estimates of the cash flows that they believe that they can generate over the next 10 years on thisinvestment.Table 5.2: Expected Cash Flows form Bangkok Disney (in U.S.
dollars)

 Note that the cash flows are estimated in dollars, purely for convenience and that the entire analysis could have been done in the local currency.
The negative cash flows in the first 3 years represent the initial investment and the terminal value is an estimate of the value of the theme park investments at the end of the tenth year.

 We will first estimate a risk-adjusted discount rate for this investment, based upon both the riskiness of the theme park business and the fact that the theme parks will be located in Thailand, thus exposing Disney to some additional political and economic risk.
Cost of capital = Risk free Rate + Business risk premium + Country Risk premium=4% + 3.90% + 2.76% = 10.66%

 The business risk premium is reflective of the non-diversifiable or market risk of being in the theme park business,10 whereas the country risk premium reflects the risk involved in the location.11 Appendix 1 includes a fuller description of these adjustments.
The risk- adjusted value of the project can be estimated by discounting the expected cash flows at the risk-adjusted cost of capital (in table 5.3).As an alternative, lets try the certainty equivalent approach.
For purposes of simplicity, we will strip the total risk premium in the cost of capital and use this number to convert the expected cash flows into certainty equivalents in table 5.4:1+ Risk — adjusted Cost of capital _ 1= 1.1066/1.04-1 = 6.4038%Table 5.4: Certainty Equivalent Cash Flows and Risk Adjusted Value

 10 For a more detailed discussion of the computation, check Damodaran, A., 2005, Applied Corporate Finance, Second Edition, John Wiley and Sons.
11 The additional risk premium was based upon Thailand’s country rating and default spread as a country, augmented for the additional risk of equity.
The details of this calculation are also in Damodaran, A., 2005, Applied Corporate Finance, Second Edition, John Wiley and Sons.Note that the certainty equivalent cash flows are discounted back at the riskfree rate to yield the same risk-adjusted value as in the first approach.
Not surprisingly, the risk- adjusted value is identical with this approach.12

 Finally, let us assume that we could insure at least against country risk and that the after-tax cost of buying this insurance will be $150 million a year, each year for the next 10 years.
Reducing the expected cash flows by the after-tax cost of insurance yields the after-tax cash flows in table 5.5.Table 5.5: Expected Cash Flows after Insurance Paymentsrisk-adjusted value in this approach of $670 million is different from the estimates in the first two approaches because the insurance market’s perceptions of risk are different from those that gave rise to the country risk premium of 2.76% in the first two analyses.

 There are good reasons why risk adjustment is most often done in a discounted cash flow framework.
When the risk adjustment is made through a risk and return model, whether it is the CAPM, the arbitrage pricing model or a multi-factor model, the effect is transparent and clearly visible to others looking at the valuation.
If they disagree with the computation, they can change it.
In addition, the models are explicit about the risks that are adjusted for and the risks that do not affect the discount rate.
In the CAPM, for instance, it is only the risks that cannot be diversified away by a well-diversified investor that are reflected in the beta.

 There are, however, costs associated with letting risk and return models carry the burden of capturing the consequences of risk.
Analysts take the easy way out when it comes to assessing risk, using the beta or betas of assets to measure risk and them moving on to estimate cash flows and value, secure in the comfort that they have already considered the effects of risk and its consequences for value.
In reality, risk and return models make assumptions about how both markets and investors behave that are at odds with actual behavior.
Given the complicated relationship between investors and risk, there is no way that we can capture the effects of risk fully into a discount rate or a cashflow adjustment.

 A second approach to assessing risk is to value a risky investment or asset as if it had no risk and to then adjust the value for risk after the valuation.
These post-valuation adjustments usually take the form of discounts to assessed value, but there are cases where the potential for upside from risk is reflected in premiums.12 Using the approximate risk premium of 6.66% (Risk-adjusted cost of capital minus the riskfree rate) would have yielded a value of $661 million.

 It is possible to adjust for all risk in the post-valuation phase – discount expected cash flows at a riskfree rate and then apply a discount to that value - but the tools that are necessary for making this adjustment are the same ones we use to compute risk-adjusted discount rates and certainty equivalents.
As a consequence, it is uncommon, and most analysts who want to adjust for risk prefer to use the conventional approach of adjusting the discount rates or cash flows.
The more common practice with post-valuation adjustments is for analysts to capture some of the risks that they perceive in a risk- adjusted discount rate and deal with other risks in the post-valuation phase as discounts or premiums.
Thus, an analyst valuing a private company will first value it using a high discount rate to reflect its business risk, but they apply an illiquidity discount to the computed value to arrive at the final value estimate.

 In this section, we will begin by looking at why analysts are drawn to the practice of post-valuation discounts and premiums and follow up by taking a closer look at some of the common risk adjustments.
We will end the section by noting the dangers of what we call value garnishing.

 Post-valuation risk discounts reflect the belief on the part of analysts that conventional risk and return models short change or even ignore what they see as significant risks.
Consider again the illiquidity discount.
The CAPM and multi-factor models do not explicitly adjust expected returns for illiquidity.
In fact, the expected return on two stocks with the same beta will be equal, even though one might be widely traded and liquid and the other is not.
Analysts valuing illiquid assets or businesses therefore feel that they are over valuing these investments, using conventional risk and return models; the illiquidity discount is their way of bringing the estimated value down to a more “reasonable” number.

 The rationale for applying post-valuation premiums is different.
Premiums are usually motivated by the concern that the expected cash flows do not fully capture the potential for large payoffs in some investments.
An analyst who believes that there is synergy in a merger and does not feel that the cash flows reflect this synergy will add a premium for it to the estimated value.

 It is not uncommon to see valuations where the initial assessments of value of a risky asset are discounted by 30% or 40% for one potential downside risk or another.
In this section, we will examine perhaps the most common of these discounts – for illiquidity or lack of marketability – in detail and the dangers associated with the practice.1.
Illiquidity DiscountWhen you take invest in an asset, you generally would like to preserve the option

 to liquidate that investment if you need to.
The need for liquidity arises not only because your views on the asset value change over time – you may perceive is as a bargain today but it may become over priced in the future - but also because you may need the cash from the liquidation to meet other contingencies.
Some assets can be liquidated with almost no cost – Treasury bills are a good example – whereas others involve larger costs – stock in a lightly traded over-the-counter stock or real estate.
With investments in a private business, liquidation cost as a percent of firm value can be substantial.
Consequently, the value of equity in a private business may need to be discounted for this potential illiquidity.
In this section, we will consider measures of illiquidity, how much investors value illiquidity and how analysts try to incorporate illiquidity into value.Measuring illiquidity

 You can sell any asset, no matter how illiquid it is perceived to be, if you are willing to accept a lower price for it.
Consequently, we should not categorize assets into liquid and illiquid assets but allow for a continuum on liquidity, where all assets are illiquid but the degree of illiquidity varies across them.
One way of capturing the cost of illiquidity is through transactions costs, with less liquid assets bearing higher transactions costs (as a percent of asset value) than more liquid assets.

 With publicly traded stock, there are some investors who undoubtedly operate under the misconception that the only cost of trading is the brokerage commission that they pay when they buy or sell assets.
While this might be the only cost that they pay explicitly, there are other costs that they incur in the course of trading that generally dwarf the commission cost.
When trading any asset, they are three other ingredients thatgo into the trading costs.It is the sum of these costs, in conjunction with the commission costs that makes up the trading cost on an asset.If the cost of trading stocks can be substantial, it should be even larger for assets that are not traded regularly such as real assets or equity positions in private companies.for larger transactions, but they will be well in excess of commissions on financial assets.
With fine art or collectibles, the commissions become even higher.
If you sell a Picasso through one of the auction houses, you may have to pay15-20% of the value of the painting as a commission.
Why are the costs so high? The first reason is that there are far fewer intermediaries in real asset businesses than there are in the stock or bond markets.
The second is that real estate and fine art are not standardized products.
In other words, one Picasso can be very different from another, and you often need the help of experts to judge value.
This adds to the cost in the process.In summary, the costs of trading assets that are usually not traded are likely to be substantial.Theoretical Backing for an Illiquidity Discount

 Assume that you are an investor trying to determine how much you should pay for an asset.
In making this determination, you have to consider the cashflows that the asset will generate for you and how risky these cashflows are to arrive at an estimate of intrinsic value.
You will also have to consider how much it will cost you to sell this asset when you decide to divest it in the future.
In fact, if the investor buying the asset from you builds in a similar estimate of transactions cost she will face when she sells it, the value of the asset today should reflect the expected value of all future transactions cost to all future holders of the asset.
This is the argument that Amihud and Mendelson used in

 1986, when they suggested that the price of an asset would embed the present value of the costs associated with expected transactions costs in the future.14 In their model, the bid-ask spread is used as the measure of transactions costs and even small spreads can translate into big illiquidity discounts on value, if trading is frequent.
The magnitude of the discount will be a function of investor holding periods and turnover ratios, with shorter holding periods and higher turnover associated with bigger discounts.
In more intuitive terms, if you face a 1% bid-ask spread and you expect to trade once a year, the value of the asset today should be reduced by the present value of the costs your will pay in perpetuity.
With a 8% discount rate, this will work out to roughly an illiquidity discount of 12.5% (.01/.08).

 What is the value of liquidity? Put differently, when does an investor feel the loss of liquidity most strongly when holding an asset? There are some who would argue that the value of liquidity lies in being able to sell an asset, when it is most overpriced; the cost of illiquidity is not being able to do this.
In the special case, where the owner of an asset has the information to know when this overpricing occurs, the value of illiquidity can be considered an option, Longstaff presents an upper bound for the option by considering an investor with perfect market timing abilities who owns an asset on which she is not allowed to trade for a period (t).
In the absence of trading restrictions, this investor would sell at the maximum price that an asset reaches during the time period and the value of the look-back option estimated using this maximum price should be the outer bound for the value of illiquidity.15 Using this approach, Longstaff estimates how much marketability would be worth as a percent of the value of an asset for different illiquidity periods and asset volatilities.
The results are graphed in figure 5.1:14 Amihud, Y.
and H.
Mendelson, 1986, Asset Pricing and the Bid-ask Spread, Journal of Financial Economics, v 17, 223-250.
15 Longstaff, F.A., 1995, How much can marketability affect security values? Journal of Finance, v 50, 1767-1774.Empirical Evidence that Illiquidity Matters

 If we accept the proposition that illiquidity has a cost, the next question becomes an empirical one.
How big is this cost and what causes it to vary across time and across assets? The evidence on the prevalence and the cost of illiquidity is spread over a number of asset classes.

 a.
Bond Market: There are wide differences in liquidity across bonds issued by different entities, and across maturities, for bonds issued by the same entity.
These differences in liquidity offer us an opportunity to examine whether investors price liquidity and if so, how much, by comparing the yields of liquid bonds with otherwise similar illiquid bonds.

 Amihud and Mendelson compared the yields on treasury bonds with less than six months left to maturity with treasury bills that have the same maturity.16 They concluded that the yield on the less liquid treasury bond was 0.43% higher on an annualized basis than the yield on the more liquid treasury bill, a difference that they attributed to illiquidity.
A study of over 4000 corporate bonds in both investment grade and speculative categories concluded that illiquid bonds had much higher yield spreads than liquid bonds.
Comparing yields on these corporate bonds, the study concluded that the yield increases 0.21% for every 1% increase in transactions costs for investment grade bonds, whereas the yield increases 0.82% for every 1% increase in transactions costs for speculative bonds.17 Looking across the studies, the consensus finding is that liquidity matters for allbonds, but that it matters more with risky bonds than with safer bonds.

 b.
Publicly Traded Stocks: It can be reasonably argued that the costs associated with trading equities are larger than the costs associated with trading treasury bonds or bills.
It follows therefore that some of the equity risk premium, that we discussed in chapter 4, has to reflect these additional transactions costs.
Jones, for instance, examines bid-ask spreads and transactions costs for the Dow Jones stocks from 1900 to 2000 and concludes that the transactions costs are about 1% lower today than they were in the early 1900s and that this may account for the lower equity risk premium in recent years.18 Within the stock market, some stocks are more liquid than others and studies have looked at the consequences of these differences in liquidity for returns.
The consensus conclusion is that investors demand higher returns when investing in more illiquid stocks.
Put another way, investors are willing to pay higher prices for more liquid investments relative to lessliquid investments.c.
Restricted Stocks: Much of the evidence on illiquidity discounts comes from examining “restricted stock” issued by publicly traded firms.
Restricted securities are

 16 Amihud, Y., and H.
Mendelson, 1991, Liquidity, Maturity and the Yield on U.S.
Treasury Securities, Journal of Finance, 46, 1411-1425.
17 Chen, L., D.A.
Lesmond and J.
Wei, 2005, Corporate Yield Spreads and Bond Liquidity, Working Paper, SSRN.
18 This becomes clear when we look at forward-looking or implied equity risk premiums rather than historical risk premiums.
The premiums during the 1990s averaged about 3%, whereas there were more than 5% prior to 1960.
Jones, C.M., 2002, A Century of Stock Market Liquidity and Trading Costs, Working Paper, Columbia University.

 securities issued by a publicly traded company, not registered with the SEC, and sold through private placements to investors under SEC Rule 144.
They cannot be resold in the open market for a one-year holding period19, and limited amounts can be sold after that.
When this stock is issued, the issue price is set much lower than the prevailing market price, which is observable, and the difference can be viewed as a discount for illiquidity.
The results of two of the earliest and most quoted studies that have looked at the magnitude of this discount are summarized below:

 Other studies confirm these findings of a substantial discount, with discounts ranging from 30-35%, though one recent study by Johnson did find a smaller discount of 20%.22 These studies have been used by practitioners to justify large marketability discounts, but there are reasons to be skeptical.
First, these studies are based upon small sample sizes, spread out over long time periods, and the standard errors in the estimates are substantial.
Second, most firms do not make restricted stock issues and the firms that do make these issues tend to be smaller, riskier and less healthy than the typical firm.
This selection bias may be skewing the observed discount.
Third, the investors with whom equity is privately placed may be providing other services to the firm, for which the discount is compensation.

 d.
Private Equity: Private equity and venture capital investors often provide capital to private businesses in exchange for a share of the ownership in these businesses.
Implicit in these transactions must be the recognition that these investments are not liquid.
If private equity investors value liquidity, they will discount the value of the private

 19 The holding period was two years prior to 1997 and has been reduced to one year since.
20 Maher, J.M., 1976, Discounts for Lack of Marketability for Closely Held Business Interests, Taxes, 54, 562-571.
21 Silber, W.L., 1991, Discounts on Restricted Stock: The Impact of Illiquidity on Stock Prices, Financial Analysts Journal, v47, 60-64.

 business for this illiquidity and demand a larger share of the ownership of illiquid businesses for the same investment.
Looking at the returns earned by private equity investors, relative to the returns earned by those investing in publicly traded companies, should provide a measure of how much value they attach to illiquidity.
Ljungquist and Richardson estimate that private equity investors earn excess returns of 5 to 8%, relative to the public equity market, and that this generates about 24% in risk-adjusted additional value to a private equity investor over 10 years.
They interpret it to represent compensation for holding an illiquid investment for 10 years.23 Das, Jagannathan and Sarin take a more direct approach to estimating private company discounts by looking at how venture capitalists value businesses (and the returns they earn) at different stages of the life cycle.
They conclude that the private company discount is only 11% for late stage investments but can be as high as 80% for early stage businesses.
24Illiquidity Discounts in Practice

 The standard practice in many private company valuations is to either use a fixed illiquidity discount for all firms or, at best, to have a range for the discount, with the analyst’s subjective judgment determining where in the range a particular company’s discount should fall.
The evidence for this practice can be seen in both the handbooks most widely used in private company valuation and in the court cases where these valuations are often cited.
The genesis for these fixed discounts seems to be in the early studies of restricted stock that we noted in the last section.
These studies found that restricted (and therefore illiquid) stocks traded at discounts of 25-35%, relative to their unrestricted counterparts, and private company appraisers have used discounts of the same magnitude in their valuations.25 Since many of these valuations are for tax court, we

 22 B.
A.
Johnson,1999, Quantitative Support for Discounts for Lack of Marketability, Business Valuation Review, v16, 152-55 .
23 Ljungquist, A.
and M.
Richardson, 2003, The Cashflow, Return and Risk Characteristics of Private Equity, Working Paper, Stern School of Business.
24 Das, S., M.
Jagannathan and A.
Sarin, 2002, The Private Equity Discount: An Empirical Examination of the Exit of Venture Capital Companies, Working Paper, SSRN.
25 In recent years, some appraisers have shifted to using the discounts on stocks in IPOs in the years prior to the offering.
The discount is similar in magnitude to the restricted stock discount.can see the trail of “restricted stock” based discounts littering the footnotes of dozens ofcases in the last three decades.26

 In recent years, analysts have become more creative in their measurement of the illiquidity discount.
They have used option pricing models and studies of transactions just prior to initial public offerings to motivate their estimates and been more willing to estimate firm-specific illiquidity discounts.27 Appendix 2 describes some of the approaches used to compute liquidity discounts.2.
Other Discounts

 While illiquidity discounts are the most common example of post-valuation discounts, there are other risks that also show up as post-valuation adjustments.
For instance, analysts valuing companies that are subject to regulation will sometimes discount the value for uncertainty about future regulatory changes and companies that have exposure to lawsuits for adverse judgments on these cases.
In each of these cases, analysts concluded that the risk was significant but difficult to incorporate into a discount rate.
In practice, the discounts tend to be subjective and reflect the analyst’s overall risk aversion and perception of the magnitude of the risk.

 Just as analysts try to capture downside risk that is missed by the discount rates in a post-valuation discount, they try to bring in upside potential that is not fully incorporated into the cashflows into valuations as premiums.
In this section, we will examine two examples of such premiums – control and synergy premiums – that show up widely in acquisition valuations.

 26 As an example, in one widely cited tax court case (McCord versus Commissioner, 2003), the expert for the taxpayer used a discount of 35% that he backed up with four restricted stock studies.
27 One common device used to compute illiquidity discounts is to value an at-the-money put option with the illiquidity period used as the life of the option and the variance in publicly traded stocks in the same business as the option volatility.
The IPO studies compare prices at which individuals sell their shares in companies just prior to an IPO to the IPO price; the discounts range from 40-60% and are attributed to illiquidity.1.
Control PremiumIt is not uncommon in private company and acquisition valuations to see

 premiums of 20% to 30% attached to estimated value to reflect the “value of control’.
But what exactly is this premium for? The value of controlling a firm derives from the fact that you believe that you or someone else would operate the firm differently from the way it is operated currently.
When we value a business, we make implicit or explicit assumptions about both who will run that business and how they will run it.
In other words, the value of a business will be much lower if we assume that it is run by incompetent managers rather than by competent ones.
When valuing an existing company, private or public, where there is already a management in place, we are faced with a choice.
We can value the company run by the incumbent managers and derive what we can call a status quo value.
We can also revalue the company with a hypothetical “optimal” management team and estimate an optimal value.
The difference between the optimal and the status quo values can be considered the value of controlling the business.

 If we apply this logic, the value of control should be much greater at badly managed and run firms and much smaller at well-managed firms.
In addition, the expected value of control will reflect the difficulty you will face in replacing incumbent management.
Consequently, the expected value of control should be smaller in markets where corporate governance is weak and larger in markets where hostile acquisitions and management changes are common.

 Analysts who apply control premiums to value are therefore rejecting the path of explicitly valuing control, by estimating an optimal value and computing a probability of management change, in favor of a simpler but less precise approximation.
To prevent double counting, they have to be careful to make sure that they are applying the premium to a status quo value (and not to an optimal value).
Implicitly, they are also assuming that the firm is badly run and that its value can be increased by a new management team.2.
Synergy PremiumSynergy is the additional value that is generated by combining two firms, creating opportunities that would not been available to these firms operating independently.
Operating synergies affect the operations of the combined firm and include economies of scale, increased pricing power and higher growth potential.
They generally show up ashigher expected cash flows.
Financial synergies, on the other hand, are more focused and include tax benefits, diversification, a higher debt capacity and uses for excess cash.
They sometimes show up as higher cash flows and sometimes take the form of lower discount rates.

 Since we can quantify the impact of synergy on cash flows and discount rates, we can explicitly value it.
Many analysts, though, are either unwilling or unable to go through this exercise, arguing that synergy is too subjective and qualitative for the estimates to be reliable.
Instead, they add significant premiums to estimated value to reflect potential synergies.

 Though the temptation to adjust value for downside and upside risk that has been overlooked is strong, there are clearly significant dangers.
The first is that these risks can be easily double counted, if analysts bring their concerns about the risk into the estimation of discount rates and cash flows.
In other words, an analyst valuing an illiquid asset may decide to use a higher discount rate for that asset because of its lack of marketability, thus pushing down value, and then proceed to apply a discount to that value.
Similarly, an analyst evaluating an acquisition may increase the growth rate in cash flows to reflect the control and synergy benefits from the acquisition and thus increase value; attaching control and synergy premiums to this value will risk double counting the benefits.

 The second problem is that the magnitude of the discounts and premiums are, if not arbitrary, based upon questionable evidence.
For instance, the 20% control premium used so often in practice comes from looking at the premiums ((over the market price) paid in acquisitions, but these premiums reflect not just control and synergy and also any overpayment on acquisitions.
Once these premiums become accepted in practice, they are seldom questioned or analyzed.The third problem is that adjusting an estimated value with premiums and discounts opens the door for analysts to bring their biases into the number.
Thus, an analyst who arrives at an estimate of $100 million for the value of a company and feels itis too low can always add a 20% control premium to get to $ 120 million, even though it may not be merited in this case.

 The risk adjustment approaches we have talked about in this chapter have been built around the premise that assets are valuing using discounted cash flow models.
Thus, we can increase the discount rate, replace uncertain cash flows with certainty equivalent numbers or apply discounts to estimated value to bring risk into the value.
Most valuations, in practice, are based upon relative valuation, i.e., the values of most assets are estimated by looking at how the market prices similar or comparable assets.
In this section, we will examine how analysts adjust for risk when doing relative valuation.In relative valuation, the value of an asset is derived from the pricing of

 'comparable' assets, standardized using a common variable.
Included in this description are two key components of relative valuation.
The first is the notion of comparable or similar assets.
From a valuation standpoint, this would imply assets with similar cash flows, risk and growth potential.
In practice, it is usually taken to mean other companies that are in the same business as the company being valued.
The other is a standardized price.
After all, the price per share of a company is in some sense arbitrary since it is a function of the number of shares outstanding; a two for one stock split would halve the price.
Dividing the price or market value by some measure that is related to that value will yield a standardized price.
When valuing stocks, this essentially translates into using multiples where we divide the market value by earnings, book value or revenues to arrive at an estimate of standardized value.
We can then compare these numbers across companies.

 The simplest and most direct applications of relative valuations are with real assets where it is easy to find similar assets or even identical ones.
The asking price for a Mickey Mantle rookie baseball card or a 1965 Ford Mustang is relatively easy to estimate given that there are other Mickey Mantle cards and 1965 Ford Mustangs out there and that the prices at which they have been bought and sold can be obtained.
With equity

 valuation, relative valuation becomes more complicated by two realities.
The first is the absence of similar assets, requiring us to stretch the definition of comparable to include companies that are different from the one that we are valuing.
After all, what company in the world is similar to Microsoft or GE? The other is that different ways of standardizing prices (different multiples) can yield different values for the same company.The adjustments for risk in relative valuations are surprisingly rudimentary and require strong assumptions to be justified.
To make matters worse, the adjustments are often implicit, rather than explicit, and completely subjective.

 a.
Sector comparisons: In practice, analysts called upon to value a software company will compare it to other software companies and make no risk adjustments.
Implicit is the assumption that all software firms are of equivalent risk and that their price earnings ratios can therefore be compared safely.
As the risk characteristics of firms within sectors diverge, this approach will lead to misleading estimates of value for firms that have more or less risk than the average firm in the sector; the former will be over valued and thelatter will be under valued.

 b.
Market Capitalization or Size: In some cases, especially in sectors with lots of firms, analysts will compare a firm only to firms of roughly the same size (in terms of revenues or market capitalization).
The implicit assumption is that smaller firms are riskier than larger firms and should trade at lower multiples of earnings, revenues and book value.
c.
Ratio based Comparisons: An approach that adds a veneer or sophistication to relative valuation is to compute a ratio of value or returns to a measure of risk.
For instance, portfolio managers will often compute the ratio of the expected return on an investment to its standard deviation; the resulting “Sharpe ratio” and can be considered a measure of the returns you can expect to earn for a given unit of risk.
Assets that have higher Sharpe ratios are considered better investments.

 d.
Statistical Controls: We can control for risk in a relative valuation statistically.
Reverting to the software sector example, we can regress the PE ratios of software companies against their expected growth rates and some measure of risk (standard deviation in stock price or earnings, market capitalization or beta) to see if riskier firmsare priced differently from safer firms.
The resulting output can be used to estimate predicted PE ratios for individual companies that control for the growth potential and risk of these companies.

 It should come as no surprise that the risk adjustments in relative valuation do not match up to the risk adjustments in discounted cash flow valuation.
The fact that risk is usually considered explicitly in discounted cash flow models gives them an advantage over relative valuations, with its ad-hoc treatment of risk.
This advantage can be quickly dissipated, though, if we are sloppy about how we risk adjust the cash flows or discount rates or if we use arbitrary premiums and discounts on estimated value.

 The nature of the risk adjustment in discounted cash flow valuation makes it more time and information intensive; we need more data and it takes longer to adjust discount rates than to compare a software company’s PE to the average for the software sector.
If time and/or data is scarce, it should come as no surprise that individuals choose the less precise risk adjustment procedure embedded in relative valuation.

 There is one final difference.
In relative valuation, we are far more dependent on markets being right, at least on average, for the risk adjustment to work.
In other words, even if we are correct in our assessment that all software companies have similar risk exposures, the market still has to price software companies correctly for the average price earnings ratio to be a good measure of an individual company’s equity value.
We may be dependent upon markets for some inputs in a DCF model – betas and risk premiums, for instance – but the assumption of market efficiency is less consequential.

 In this chapter, we have described four ways of adjusting for risk: use a higher discount rate for risky assets, reduce uncertain expected cash flows, apply a discount to estimated value and look at how the market is pricing assets of similar risk.
Though each of these approaches can be viewed as self-standing and sufficient, analysts often use more than one approach to adjust for risk in the same valuation.
In many discounted cash flow valuations, the discount rate is risk-adjusted (using the CAPM or multi-factor model), thecash flow projections are conservative (reflecting a cash flow risk adjustment), the terminal value is estimated using a multiple obtained by looking at comparable companies (relative valuation risk adjustment) and there is a post-valuation discount for illiquidity.

 At the risk of repeating what we said in an earlier section, using multiple risk adjustment procedures in the same valuation not only makes it difficult to decipher the effect of the risk adjustment but also creates the risk of double counting or even triple counting the same risk in value.With risk-adjusted values, we try to incorporate the effect of risk into our

 estimates of asset value.
In this chapter, we began by looking at ways in which we can do this in a valuation.
First, we can estimate a risk-adjusted discount rate, relying if need be on a risk and return model which measures risk and converts it into a risk premium.
Second, we can discount uncertain expected cash flows to reflect the uncertainty; if the risk premium computed in a risk and return model is used to accomplish this, the value obtained in this approach will be identical to the one estimated with risk adjusted discount rates.
Third, we can discount the estimated value of an asset for those risks that we believe have not been incorporated into the discount rate or the cash flows.
Finally, we can use the market pricing of assets of similar risk to estimate the value for a risky asset.
The difficulty of finding assets that have similar risk exposure leads to approximate solutions such as using other companies in the same business as the company beingvalued.Appendix 5.1: Adjusting Discount Rates for Country Risk

 In many emerging markets, there is very little historical data and the data that exists is too volatile to yield a meaningful estimate of the risk premium.
To estimate the risk premium in these countries, let us start with the basic proposition that the risk premium in any equity market can be written as:Equity Risk Premium = Base Premium for Mature Equity Market + Country Premium The country premium could reflect the extra risk in a specific market.
This boils down our estimation to answering two questions:

 To answer the first question, we will make the argument that the US equity market is a mature market and that there is sufficient historical data in the United States to make a reasonable estimate of the risk premium.
In fact, reverting back to our discussion of historical premiums in the US market, we will use the geometric average premium earned by stocks over treasury bonds of 4.82% between 1928 and 2003.
We chose the long time period to reduce standard error, the treasury bond to be consistent with our choice of a riskfree rate and geometric averages to reflect our desire for a risk premium that we can use for longer term expected returns.
There are three approaches that we can use to estimate the country risk premium.28 The process by which country ratings are obtained is explained on the S&P web site at http://www.ratings.standardpoor.com/criteria/index.htm.(4%) on a 10-year treasury bond at the same time.29 Analysts who use default spreads as measures of country risk typically add them on to both the cost of equity and debt of every company traded in that country.
For instance, the cost of equity for a Brazilian company, estimated in U.S.
dollars, will be 6.01% higher than the cost of equity of an otherwise similar U.S.
company.
If we assume that the risk premium for the United States and other mature equity markets is 4.82%, the cost of equity for a Brazilian company can be estimated as follows (with a U.S.
Treasury bond rate of 4% and a beta of 1.2).Cost of equity = Riskfree rate + Beta *(U.S.
Risk premium) + Country Bond= 4% + 1.2 (4.82%) + 6.01% = 15.79%In some cases, analysts add the default spread to the U.S.
risk premium and multiply it by the beta.
This increases the cost of equity for high beta companies and lowers them for low beta firms.This relative standard deviation when multiplied by the premium used for U.S.
stocks should yield a measure of the total risk premium for any market.Equity risk premium ¢ounry x = Risk Premumys * Relative Standard DeviationCountry xAssume, for the moment, that you are using a mature market premium for the UnitedStates of 4.82% and that the annual standard deviation of U.S.
stocks is 20%.
The

 29 These yields were as of January 1, 2004.
While this is a market rate and reflects current expectations, country bond spreads are extremely volatile and can shift significantly from day to day.
To counter this volatility, the default spread can be normalized by averaging the spread over time or by using the average default spread for all countries with the same rating as Brazil in early 2003.annualized standard deviation30 in the Brazilian equity index was 36%, yielding a total risk premium for Brazil:The country risk premium can be isolated as follows:Country Risk Premium,,,,;,, = 8.67% - 4.82% = 3.85% BrazilWhile this approach has intuitive appeal, there are problems with using standard deviations computed in markets with widely different market structures and liquidity.
There are very risky emerging markets that have low standard deviations for their equity markets because the markets are illiquid.
This approach will understate the equity risk premiums in those markets.To illustrate, consider the case of Brazil.
As noted earlier, the dollar denominated bonds issued by the Brazilian government trade with a default spread of 6.01% over the US treasury bond rate.
The annualized standard deviation in the Brazilian equity index over the previous year was 36%, while the annualized standard deviation in the Brazilian dollar denominated C-bond was 27%31.
The resulting additional country equity risk premium for Brazil is as follows:

 30 Both the US and Brazilian standard deviations were computed using weekly returns for two years from the beginning of 2002 to the end of 2003.
While you could use daily standard deviations to make the same judgments, they tend to have much more noise in them.
31 The standard deviation in C-Bond returns was computed using weekly returns over 2 years as well.
Since there returns are in dollars and the returns on the Brazilian equity index are in real, there is an inconsistencyNote that this country risk premium will increase if the country rating drops or if the relative volatility of the equity market increases.
It is also in addition to the equity risk premium for a mature market.
Thus, the total equity risk premium for a Brazilian company using the approach and a 4.82% premium for the United States would be 12.49%.Why should equity risk premiums have any relationship to country bond spreads? A simple explanation is that an investor who can make 11% on a dollar-denominated Brazilian government bond would not settle for an expected return of 10.5% (in dollar terms) on Brazilian equity.
Both this approach and the previous one use the standard deviation in equity of a market to make a judgment about country risk premium, but they measure it relative to different bases.
This approach uses the country bond as a base, whereas the previous one uses the standard deviation in the U.S.
market.
This approach assumes that investors are more likely to choose between Brazilian government bonds and Brazilian equity, whereas the previous one approach assumesthat the choice is across equity markets.

 The three approaches to estimating country risk premiums will generally give you different estimates, with the bond default spread and relative equity standard deviation approaches yielding lower country risk premiums than the melded approach that uses both the country bond default spread and the equity and bond standard deviations.
In the case of Brazil, for instance, the country risk premiums range from 3.85% using the relative equity standard deviation approach to 6.01% for the country bond approach to We believe that the larger country risk premiums that emerge from the last approach are the most realistic for the immediate future, but that country risk premiums may decline over time.
Just as companies mature and become less risky over time, countries can mature and become less risky as well.here.
We did estimate the standard deviation on the Brazilian equity index in dollars but it made little difference to the overall calculation since the dollar standard deviation was close to 36%.Appendix 5.2: Estimating the Illiquidity Discount

 In conventional valuation, there is little scope for showing the effect of illiquidity.
The cashflows are expected cashflows, the discount rate is usually reflective of the risk in the cashflows and the present value we obtain is the value for a liquid business.
With publicly traded firms, we then use this value, making the implicit assumption that illiquidity is not a large enough problem to factor into valuation.
In private company valuations, analysts have been less willing (with good reason) to make this assumption.
The standard practice in many private company valuations is to apply an illiquidity discount to this value.
But how large should this discount be and how can we best estimate in? This is a very difficult question to answer empirically because the discount in private company valuations itself cannot be observed.
Even if we were able to obtain the terms of all private firm transactions, note that what is reported is the price at which private firms are bought and sold.
The value of these firms is not reported and the illiquidity discount is the difference between the value and the price.
In this section, we will consider four approaches that are in use – a fixed discount (with marginal and subjective adjustments for individual firm differences), a firm-specific discount based upon a firm’s characteristics, a discount obtained by estimating a synthetic bid-ask spread for an asset and an option-based illiquidity discount.a.
Fixed Discount

 The standard practice in many private company valuations is to either use a fixed illiquidity discount for all firms or, at best, to have a range for the discount, with the analyst’s subjective judgment determining where in the range a particular company’s discount should fall.
The evidence for this practice can be seen in both the handbooks most widely used in private company valuation and in the court cases where these valuations are often cited.
The genesis for these fixed discounts seems to be in the early studies of restricted stock that we noted in the last section.
These studies found that restricted (and therefore illiquid) stocks traded at discounts of 25-35%, relative to their unrestricted counterparts, and private company appraisers have used discounts of thesame magnitude in their valuations.32 Since many of these valuations are for tax court, we can see the trail of “restricted stock” based discounts littering the footnotes of dozens of cases in the last three decades.33

 As we noted in the last section, some researchers have argued that these discounts are too large because of the sampling bias inherent in using restricted stock and that they should be replaced with smaller discounts.
In recent years, the courts have begun to look favorably at these arguments.
In a 2003 case34, the Internal Revenue Service, often at the short end of the illiquidity discount argument, was able to convince the judge that the conventional restricted stock discount was too large and to accept a smaller discount.b.
Firm-specific Discount

 Much of the theoretical and empirical discussion in this chapter supports the view that illiquidity discounts should vary across assets and business.
In particular, with a private company, you would expect the illiquidity discount to be a function of the size and the type of assets that the company owns.
In this section, we will consider the determinants of the illiquidity discount and practical ways of estimating it.Determinants of Illiquidity Discounts

 With any asset, the illiquidity discount should be a function of the number of potential buyers for the asset and the ease with which that asset can be sold.
Thus, the illiquidity discount should be relatively small for an asset with a large number of potential buyers (such as real estate) than for an asset with a relatively small number of buyers (an expensive collectible).
With private businesses, the illiquidity discount is likely to vary across both firms and buyers, which renders rules of thumb useless.
Let us consider first some of the factors that may cause the discount to vary across firms.1.
Liquidity of assets owned by the firm: The fact that a private firm is difficult to sell may be rendered moot if its assets are liquid and can be sold with no significant loss

 32 In recent years, some appraisers have shifted to using the discounts on stocks in IPOs in the years prior to the offering.
The discount is similar in magnitude to the restricted stock discount.
33 As an example, in one widely cited tax court case (McCord versus Commissioner, 2003), the expert for the taxpayer used a discount of 35% that he backed up with four restricted stock studies.
34 The court case was McCord versus Commissioner.
In the case, the taxpayer’s expert argued for a discount of 35% based upon the restricted stock studies.
The IRS argued for a discount of 7%, on the basisin value.
A private firm with significant holdings of cash and marketable securities should have a lower illiquidity discount than one with factories or other assets for which there are relatively few buyers.2.
Financial Health and Cash flows of the firm: A private firm that is financially healthy should be easier to sell than one that is not healthy.
In particular, a firm with strong earnings and positive cash flows should be subject to a smaller illiquidity discount than one with losses and negative cash flows.3.
Possibility of going public in the future: The greater the likelihood that a private firm can go public in the future, the lower should be the illiquidity discount attached to its value.
In effect, the probability of going public is built into the valuation of the private firm.
To illustrate, the owner of a private e-commerce firm in 1998 or 1999 would not have had to apply much of a illiquidity discount to his firm’s value, if at all, because of the ease with which it could have been taken public in those years.
4.
Size of the Firm: If we state the illiquidity discount as a percent of the value of the firm, it should become smaller as the size of the firm increases.
In other words, the illiquidity discount should be smaller as a percent of firm value for private firms like Cargill and Koch Industries, which are worth billions of dollars, than it should be for a small firm worth $5 million.5.
Control Component: Investing in a private firm is decidedly more attractive when you acquire a controlling stake with your investment.
A reasonable argument can be made that a 51% stake in a private business should be more liquid than a 49% stake inthe same business.35

 The illiquidity discount is also likely to vary across potential buyers because the desire for liquidity varies among investors.
It is likely that those buyers who have deep pockets, longer time horizons and see little or no need to cash out their equity positions will attach much lower illiquidity discounts to value, for similar firms, than buyers that do not possess these characteristics.
The illiquidity discount is also likely to vary across time, as the market-wide desire for liquidity ebbs and flows.
In other words, the illiquidity discount attached to the same business will change over time even for the same buyer.that a big portion of the observed discount in restricted stock and IPO studies reflects factors other than liquidity.
The court ultimately decided on an illiquidity discount of 20%.Estimating Firm-Specific Illiquidity Discount

 While it is easy to convince skeptics that the illiquidity discount should vary across companies, it is much more difficult to get consensus on how to estimate the illiquidity discount for an individual company.
In this section, we revert back to the basis for the fixed discount studies and look and look for clues on why discounts vary across companies and how to incorporate these differences into illiquidity discounts.i.
Restricted Stock Studies

 Earlier in the chapter, we looked at studies of the discount in restricted stock.
One of the papers that we referenced by Silber (1991) examined factors that explained differences in discounts across different restricted stock by relating the size of the discount to observable firm characteristics including revenues and the size of the restricted stock offering.
He reported the following regression.LN(RPRS) = 4.33 +0.036 ln(REV) - 0.142 LN(RBRT) + 0.174 DERN + 0.332 DCUST where,RPRS = Restricted Stock Price/ Unrestricted stock price = 1 – illiquidity discountREV = Revenues of the private firm (in millions of dollars)RBRT = Restricted Block relative to Total Common Stock (in % )DERN = 1 if earnings are positive; 0 if earnings are negative;DCUST = 1 if there is a customer relationship with the investor; 0 otherwise;

 The illiquidity discount tends to be smaller for firms with higher revenues, decreases as the block offering decreases and is lower when earnings are positive and when the investor has a customer relationship with the firm.
These findings are consistent with some of the determinants that we identified in the previous section for the illiquidity premium.
In particular, the discounts tend to be smaller for larger firms (at least as measured by revenues) and for healthy firms (with positive earnings being the measure of financial health).
This would suggest that the conventional practice of using constant discounts across private firms is wrong and that we should be adjusting for differences across firms.Consider again the regression that Silber presents on restricted stock.
Not only does it yield a result specific to restricted stock, but it also provides a measure of how

 much lower the discount should be as a function of revenues.
A firm with revenue of $20 million should have an illiquidity discount that is 1.19% lower than a firm with revenues of $10 million.
Thus, we could establish a benchmark discount for a profitable firm with specified revenues (say $10 million) and adjust this benchmark discount for individual firms that have revenues much higher or lower than this number.
The regression can also be used to differentiate between profitable and unprofitable firms.
Figure 14.6 presents the difference in illiquidity discounts across both profitable and unprofitable firms with different revenues, using a benchmark discount of 25% for a firm with positive earnings and $10 million revenues.(http;//www.damodaran.com: Look under research/papers)ii.
Private PlacementsJust as Silber considered fundamental factors that cause restricted stock discounts to vary across firms, Bajaj et al.
(referenced earlier) considered various fundamental factors that may cause illiquidity discounts to vary across firms in private placements.
Their regression, run across 88 private placements between 1990 and 1995 is summarized below:DISC = 4.91% + 0.40 SHISS -0.08 Z -7.23 DREG + 3.13 SDEV R2 = 35.38%(0.89) (1.99) (2.51) (2.21) (3.92)DISC = Discount on the Market PriceSHISS = Private Placement as percent of outstanding sharesDREG = 1 if registered; 0 if unregistered (restricted stock)SDEV = Standard deviation of returns

 Other things remaining equal, the discount is larger for larger private placements (as a percent of outstanding stocks) by risky and distressed firms and smaller for safer firms.
As noted before, the discount is larger for restricted stock than for registered stock.
Hertzel and Smith (also referenced earlier) ran a similar regression with 106 private placements between 1980 and 1987 and also found larger private placement discounts at more distressed, riskier and smaller firms.

 These regressions are a little more difficult to adapt for use with private company valuations since they are composite regressions that include registered private placements (where there is no illiquidity).
However, the results reinforce the Silber regression findings that troubled or distressed firms should have larger illiquidity discounts than healthy firms.

 There are legitimate criticisms that can be mounted against the regression approach.
The first is that the R squared of these regressions is moderate (30-40%) and that the estimates will have large standard errors associated with them.
The second is that the regression coefficients are unstable and likely to change over time.
While both criticisms are valid, they really can be mounted against any cross sectional regression andcannot be used to justify a constant discount for all firms.
After all, these regressions clearly reject the hypothesis that the discount is the same across all firms.c.
Synthetic Bid-ask SpreadThe biggest limitation of using studies based upon restricted stock or private

 placements is that the samples are small.
We would be able to make far more precise estimates if we could obtain a large sample of firms with illiquidity discounts.
We would argue that such a sample exists, if we consider the fact that an asset that is publicly traded is not completely liquid.
In fact, liquidity varies widely across publicly traded stock.
A small company listed over-the-counter is much less liquid that a company listed on the New York Stock Exchange which in turn is much less liquid that a large capitalization company that is widely held.
If, as we argued earlier, the bid-ask spread is a measure of the illiquidity of a stock, we can compute the spread as a percent of the market price and relate it to a company’s fundamentals.
While the bid-ask spread might only be a quarter or half a dollar, it looms as a much larger cost when it is stated as a percent of the price per unit.
For a stock that is trading at $2, with a bid-ask spread of 1/4, this cost is 12.5%.
For higher price and very liquid stocks, the illiquidity discount may be less than 0.5% of the price, but it is not zero.
What relevance does this have for illiquidity discounts on private companies? Think of equity in a private company as a stock that never trades.
On the continuum described above, you would expect the bid-ask spread to be high for such a stock and this would essentially measure the illiquidity discount.

 To make estimates of the illiquidity discounts using the bid-ask spread as the measure, you would need to relate the bid-ask spreads of publicly traded stocks to variables that can be measured for a private business.
For instance, you could regress the bid-ask spread against the revenues of the firm and a dummy variable, reflecting whether the firm is profitable or not, and extend the regression done on restricted stocks to a much larger sample.
You could even consider the trading volume for publicly traded stocks as an independent variable and set it to zero for a private firm.
Using data from the end of 2000, for instance, we regressed the bid-ask spread against annual revenues, a dummy variable for positive earnings (DERN: 0 if negative and 1 if positive), cash as a percent of firm value and trading volume.Spread = 0.145 – 0.0022 ln (Annual Revenues) -0.015 (DERN) – 0.016 (Cash/Firm Value) – 0.11 ($ Monthly trading volume/ Firm Value)Plugging in the corresponding values – with a trading volume of zero – for a private firm should yield an estimate of the synthetic bid-ask spread for the firm.
This synthetic spread can be used as a measure of the illiquidity discount on the firm.d.
Option-Based Discount

 In an earlier section, we examined an option-pricing based approach, which allowed you to estimate an upper bound for the illiquidity discount, by assuming an investor with perfect market timing skills.
There have been attempts to extend option pricing models to valuing illiquidity, with mixed results.
In one widely used variation, liquidity is modeled as a put option for the period when an investor is restricted from trading.
Thus, the illiquidity discount on value for an asset where the owner is restricted from trading for 2 years will be modeled as a 2-year at-the-money put option.36 There are several flaws, both intuitive and conceptual, with this approach.
The first is that liquidity does not give you the right to sell a stock at today’s market price anytime over the next 2 years.
What it does give you is the right to sell at the prevailing market price anytime over the next 2 years.37 The second (and smaller) problem is that option pricing models are based upon continuous price movements and arbitrage and it is difficult to see how these assumptions will hold up for an illiquid asset.

 The value of liquidity ultimately has to derive from the investor being able to sell at some pre-determined price during the non-trading period rather than being forced to hold until the end of the period.
The look-back option approach that assumes a perfect market timer, explained earlier in the chapter, assumes that the sale would have occurred at the high price and allows us to estimate an upper bound on the value.
Can we use option pricing models to value illiquidity without assuming perfect market timing.
Consider one alternative.
Assume that you have a disciplined investor who always sells investments, when the price rises 25% above the original buying price.
Not being able to

 36 In a 1993 study, David Chaffe used this approach to estimate illiquidity discounts rangings from 28-49% for an asset, using the Black Scholes option pricing model and volatilities ranging from 60 to 90% for the underlying asset.
37 There is a simple way to illustrate that this put option has nothing to do with liquidity.
Assume that you own stock in a liquid, publicly traded company and that the current stock price is $ 50.
A 2-year put option on this stock with a strike price of $ 50 will have substantial value, even though the underlying stock is completely liquid.
The value has nothing to do with liquidity but is a price you are willing to pay for insurance.

 trade on this investment for a period (say, 2 years) undercuts this discipline and it can be argued that the value of illiquidity is the produce of the value of the put option (estimated using a strike price set 25% above the purchase price and a 2 year life) and the probability that the stock price will rise 25% or more over the next 2 years.

 If you decide to apply option pricing models to value illiquidity in private businesses, the value of the underlying asset (which is the private business) and the standard deviation in that value will be required inputs.
While estimating them for a private business is more difficult to do than for a publicly traded firm, we can always use industry averages.

 In the last chapter, we examined ways in which we can adjust the value of a risky asset for its risk.
Notwithstanding their popularity, all of the approaches share a common theme.
The riskiness of an asset is encapsulated in one number – a higher discount rate, lower cash flows or a discount to the value – and the computation almost always requires us to make assumptions (often unrealistic) about the nature of risk.

 In this chapter, we consider a different and potentially more informative way of assessing and presenting the risk in an investment.
Rather than compute an expected value for an asset that that tries to reflect the different possible outcomes, we could provide information on what the value of the asset will be under each outcome or at least a subset of outcomes.
We will begin this section by looking at the simplest version which is an analysis of an asset’s value under three scenarios – a best case, most likely case and worse case – and then extend the discussion to look at scenario analysis more generally.
We will move on to examine the use of decision trees, a more complete approach to dealing with discrete risk.
We will close the chapter by evaluating Monte Carlo simulations, the most complete approach of assessing risk across the spectrum.

 The expected cash flows that we use to value risky assets can be estimated in one or two ways.
They can represent a probability-weighted average of cash flows under all possible scenarios or they can be the cash flows under the most likely scenario.
While the former is the more precise measure, it is seldom used simply because it requires far more information to compile.
In both cases, there are other scenarios where the cash flows will be different from expectations; higher than expected in some and lower than expected in others.
In scenario analysis, we estimate expected cash flows and asset value under various scenarios, with the intent of getting a better sense of the effect of risk on value.
In this section, we first consider an extreme version of scenario analysis where we considerthe value in the best and the worst case scenarios, and then a more generalized version of scenario analysis.With risky assets, the actual cash flows can be very different from expectations.

 At the minimum, we can estimate the cash flows if everything works to perfection – a best case scenario – and if nothing does – a worst case scenario.
In practice, there are two ways in which this analysis can be structured.
In the first, each input into asset value is set to its best (or worst) possible outcome and the cash flows estimated with those values.
Thus, when valuing a firm, you may set the revenue growth rate and operating margin at the highest possible level while setting the discount rate at its lowest level, and compute the value as the best-case scenario.
The problem with this approach is that it may not be feasible; after all, to get the high revenue growth, the firm may have to lower prices and accept lower margins.
In the second, the best possible scenario is defined in terms of what is feasible while allowing for the relationship between the inputs.
Thus, instead of assuming that revenue growth and margins will both be maximized, we will choose that combination of growth and margin that is feasible and yields the best outcome.
While this approach is more realistic, it does require more work to put into practice.

 How useful is a best case/worse case analysis? There are two ways in which the results from this analysis can be utilized by decision makers.
First, the difference between the best-case and worst-case value can be used as a measure of risk on an asset; the range in value (scaled to size) should be higher for riskier investments.
Second, firms that are concerned about the potential spill over effects on their operations of an investment going bad may be able to gauge the effects by looking at the worst case outcome.
Thus, a firm that has significant debt obligations may use the worst-case outcome to make a judgment as to whether an investment has the potential to push them into default.

 In general, though, best case/worse case analyses are not very informative.
After all, there should be no surprise in knowing that an asset will be worth a lot in the best case and not very much in the worst case.
Thus, an equity research analyst who uses this approach to value a stock, priced at $ 50, may arrive at values of $ 80 for the best caseand $ 10 for the worst case; with a range that large, it will be difficult to make a judgment on a whether the stock is a good investment or not at its current price of $50.Scenario analysis does not have to be restricted to the best and worst cases.
In its most general form, the value of a risky asset can be computed under a number of different scenarios, varying the assumptions about both macro economic and asset- specific variables.Steps in scenario analysisWhile the concept of sensitivity analysis is a simple one, it has four critical components:and overall economic growth, we can draw on the expertise of services that forecast these variables.
For other scenarios, involving either the sector or competitors, we have to draw on our knowledge about the industry.
Note, though, that this makes sense only if the scenarios cover the full spectrum of possibilities.
If the scenarios represent only a sub-set of the possible outcomes on an investment, the probabilities will not add up to one.The output from a scenario analysis can be presented as values under each scenario and as an expected value across scenarios (if the probabilities can be estimated in the fourth step).

 This quantitative view of scenario analysis may be challenged by strategists, who have traditionally viewed scenario analysis as a qualitative exercise, whose primary benefit is to broaden the thinking of decision makers.
As one strategist put it, scenario analysis is about devising “plausible future narratives” rather than probable outcomes; in other words, there are benefits to considering scenarios that have a very low probability of occurring.1 The benefits of the exercise is that it forces decision makers to consider views of what may unfold than differ from the “official view”.Examples of Scenario Analysis

 To illustrate scenario analysis, consider a simple example.
The Boeing 747 is the largest capacity airplane2 that Boeing manufactures for the commercial aerospace market and was introduced in 1974.
Assume that Boeing is considering the introduction of a new large capacity airplane, capable of carrying 650 passengers, called the Super Jumbo, to replace the Boeing 747.
Arguably, as the largest and longest-serving firm in the commercial aircraft market, Boeing knows the market better than any other firm in the world.
Surveys and market testing of its primary customers, the airline companies, are unlikely to be useful tools in this case, for the following reasons.1 Randall, D.
and C.
Ertel, 2005, Moving beyond the official future, Financial Times Special Reports/ Mastering Risk, September 15, 2005.
2 The Boeing 747 has the capacity to carry 416 passengers.

 At the same time, there is considerable uncertainty as to whether airlines will be interested in a Super Jumbo Jet.
The demand for this jet will be greatest on long-haul3, international flights, since smaller airplanes are much more profitable for short-haul, domestic flights.
In addition, the demand is unlikely to support two large capacity airplanes, produced by different companies.
Thus, Boeing’s expected revenues will depend upon two fundamental factors:We will consider three scenarios for the first factor –For the Airbus response, we will also consider three scenarios –

 3 Since these planes cost a great deal more to operate, they tend to be most economical for flights over long distances.
4 Flights from Europe to North America are clearly the largest segment of the market currently.
It is also the segment least likely to grow because both markets are mature markets.In table 6.1, we estimate the number of Super Jumbo jets that Boeing expects to sell under each of these scenarios:Table 6.1: Planes sold under ScenariosThese estimates are based upon both Boeing’s knowledge of this market and responses from potential customers (willingness to place large advance orders).
The cash flows can be estimated under each of the nine scenarios, and the value of the project can be computed under each scenario.While many scenario analyses do not take this last step, we next estimate the probabilities of each of these scenarios occurring and report them in table 6.2.These probabilities represent joint probabilities; the probability of Airbus going ahead with a large jet that will directly compete with the Boeing Super Jumbo in a high-growth

 Asian economy is 12.5%.
Note also that the probabilities sum to 1, that summing up the probabilities, by column, yields the overall probabilities of different actions by Airbus, and that summing up the probabilities by row yields probabilities of different growth scenarios in Asia.
Multiplying the probabilities by the value of the project under each scenario should yield an expected value for the project.Use in Decision Making

 How useful is scenario analysis in value assessment and decision making? The answer, as with all tools, depends upon how it is used.
The most useful information from a scenario analysis is the range of values across different scenarios, which provides a snap shot of the riskiness of the asset; riskier assets will have values that vary more across scenarios and safer assets will have manifest more value stability.
In addition, scenario analysis can be useful in determining the inputs into an analysis that have the most effect on value.
In the Boeing super Jumbo jet example, the inputs that have the biggest effect on the project’s value are the health and growth prospects of the Asian economy and whether Airbus decides to build a competing aircraft.
Given the sensitivity of the decision to these variables, Boeing may devote more resources to estimating them better.
With Asian growth, in particular, it may pay to have a more thorough analysis and forecast of Asian growth prospects before Boeing commits to this large investment.

 There is one final advantage to doing scenario analysis.
Assuming Boeing decides that investing in the Super Jumbo makes economic sense, it can take proactive steps to minimize the damage that the worst case scenarios create to value.
To reduce the potential downside from Asian growth, Boeing may try to diversify its revenue base and try to sell more aircraft in Latin America and Eastern Europe.
It could even try to alter the probability of Airbus developing a competitive aircraft by using a more aggressive “low price” strategy, where it gives up some margin in return for a lower likelihood of competition in the future.

 If nothing else, the process of thinking through scenarios is a useful exercise in examining how the competition will react under different macro-economic environments and what can be done to minimize the effect of downside risk and maximize the effect of potential upside on the value of a risky asset.
In an article in the Financial Times, theauthors illustrate how scenario analysis can be used by firms considering investing large amounts in China to gauge potential risks.5 They consider four scenarios, built around how China will evolve over time –Forward-looking firms, they argue, may go into China expecting the first scenario (global economic partner) but they need to be prepared, if the other scenarios unfold.IssuesMultiple scenario analysis provides more information than a best case/ worst case analysis by providing asset values under each of the specified scenarios.
It does, however, have its own set of problems:

 1.
Garbage in, garbage out: It goes without saying that the key to doing scenario analysis well is the setting up of the scenarios and the estimation of cash flows under each one.
Not only do the outlined scenarios have to be realistic but they also have to try to cover the spectrum of possibilities.
Once the scenarios have been laid out, the cash flows have5 Clemons, E.K., S.
Barnett and J.
Lanier, 2005, Fortune favors the forward-thinking, Financial Times Special Reports / Mastering Risk, September 22, 2005.to be estimated under each one; this trade off has to be considered when determining how many scenarios will be run.

 2.
Continuous Risk: Scenario analysis is best suited for dealing with risk that takes the form of discrete outcomes.
In the Boeing example, whether Airbus develops a Super Jumbo or not is a discrete risk and the modeling of the scenario is straightforward.
When the outcomes can take on any of a very large number of potential values or the risk is continuous, it becomes more difficult to set up scenarios.
In the Boeing example, we have categorized the “growth in Asia” variable into three groups – high, average and low – but the reality is that the cut-off points that we used of 4% and 7% are subjective; thus a growth rate of 7.1% will put us in the high growth scenario but a growth rate of 6.9% will yield an average growth scenario.

 3.
Double counting of risk: As with the best case/ worst case analysis, there is the danger that decision makers will double count risk when they do scenario analysis.
Thus, an analyst, looking at the Boeing Super Jumbo jet analysis, may decide to reject the investment, even though the value of the investment (estimated using the risk adjusted discount rate) exceeds the cost at the expected production of 125 planes, because there is a significant probability (30%) that the sales will fall below the break even of 115 planes.
Since the expected value is already risk adjusted, this would represent a double counting of potentially the same risk or risk that should not be a factor in the decision in the first place (because it is diversifiable).

 In some projects and assets, risk is not only discrete but is sequential.
In other words, for the asset to have value, it has to pass through a series of tests, with failure at any point potentially translating into a complete loss of value.
This is the case, for instance, with a pharmaceutical drug that is just being tested on human beings.
The three- stage FDA approval process lays out the hurdles that have to be passed for this drug to be commercially sold, and failure at any of the three stages dooms the drug’s chances.
Decision trees allow us to not only consider the risk in stages but also to devise the right response to outcomes at each stage.The first step in understanding decision trees is to distinguish between root nodes, decision nodes, event nodes and end nodes.

 Consider a very simple example.
You are offered a choice where you can take a certain amount of $ 20 or partake in a gamble, where you can win $ 50 with probability 50% and $10 with probability 50%.
The decision tree for this offered gamble is shown in figure 6.1:Decision node

 Note the key elements in the decision tree.
First, only the event nodes represent uncertain outcomes and have probabilities attached to them.
Second, the decision node represents a choice.
On a pure expected value basis, the gamble is better (with an expected value of $ 30) than the guaranteed amount of $20; the double slash on the latter branch indicates that it would not be selected.
While this example may be simplistic, the elements of building a decision tree are in it.In general, developing a decision tree requires us to go through the following steps, though the details and the sequencing can vary from case to case:

 Step 1: Divide analysis into risk phases: The key to developing a decision tree is outlining the phases of risk that you will be exposed to in the future.
In some cases, such as the FDA approval process, this will be easy to do since there are only two outcomes – the drug gets approved to move on to the next phase or it does not.
In other cases, it will be more difficult.
For instance, a test market of a new consumer product can yieldhundreds of potential outcomes; here, you will have to create discrete categories for what would qualify as success in the test market.

 Step 2: In each phase, estimate the probabilities of the outcomes: Once the phases of the analysis have been put down and the outcomes at each phase are defined, the probabilities of the outcomes have to be computed.
In addition to the obvious requirement that the probabilities across outcomes have to sum up to one, the analyst will also have to consider whether the probabilities of outcomes in one phase can be affected by outcomes in earlier phases.
For example, how does the probability of a successful national product introduction change when the test market outcome is only average? Step 3: Define decision points: Embedded in the decision tree will be decision points where you will get to determine, based upon observing the outcomes at earlier stages, and expectations of what will occur in the future, what your best course of action will be.
With the test market example, for instance, you will get to determine, at the end of the test market, whether you want to conduct a second test market, abandon the product or move directly to a national product introduction.

 Step 4: Compute cash flows/value at end nodes: The next step in the decision tree process is estimating what the final cash flow and value outcomes will be at each end node.
In some cases, such as abandonment of a test market product, this will be easy to do and will represent the money spent on the test marketing of the product.
In other cases, such as a national launch of the same product, this will be more difficult to do since you will have to estimate expected cash flows over the life of the product and discount these cash flows to arrive at value.

 Step 5: Folding back the tree: The last step in a decision tree analysis is termed “folding back’ the tree, where the expected values are computed, working backwards through the tree.
If the node is a chance node, the expected value is computed as the probability weighted average of all of the possible outcomes.
If it is a decision node, the expected value is computed for each branch, and the highest value is chosen (as the optimal decision).
The process culminates in an expected value for the asset or investment today.66 There is a significant body of literature examining the assumptions that have to hold for this folding back process to yield consistent values.
In particular, if a decision tree is used to portray concurrent risks, the

 There are two key pieces of output that emerge from a decision tree.
The first is the expected value today of going through the entire decision tree.
This expected value will incorporate the potential upside and downside from risk and the actions that you will take along the way in response to this risk.
In effect, this is analogous to the risk adjusted value that we talked about in the last chapter.
The second is the range of values at the end nodes, which should encapsulate the potential risk in the investment.

 To illustrate the steps involved in developing a decision tree, let us consider the analysis of a pharmaceutical drug for treating Type 1 diabetes that has gone through preclinical testing and is about to enter phase 1 of the FDA approval process.7 Assume that you are provided with the additional information on each of the three phases: 1.
Phase 1 is expected to cost $ 50 million and will involve 100 volunteers to determine safety and dosage; it is expected to last 1 year.
There is a 70% chance that the drug will successfully complete the first phase.

 2.
In phase 2, the drug will be tested on 250 volunteers for effectiveness in treating diabetes over a two-year period.
This phase will cost $ 100 million and the drug will have to show a statistically significant impact on the disease to move on to the next phase.
There is only a 30% chance that the drug will prove successful in treating type 1 diabetes but there is a 10% chance that it will be successful in treating both type 1 and type 2 diabetes and a 10% chance that it will succeed only in treating type 2 diabetes.
3.
In phase 3, the testing will expand to 4,000 volunteers to determine the long-term consequences of taking the drug.
If the drug is tested on only type 1 or type 2 diabetes patients, this phase will last 4 years and cost $ 250 million; there is an 80% chance of success.
If it is tested on both types, the phase will last 4 years and cost $ 300 million;there is a 75% chance of success.

 risks should be independent of each other.
See Sarin, R.
and P.Wakker, 1994, Folding Back in Decision Tree Analysis, Management Science, v40, pg 625-628.
7 In type 1 diabetes, the pancreas do not produce insulin.
The patients are often young children and the disease is unrelated to diet and activity; they have to receive insulin to survive.
In type 2 diabetes, the pancreas produce insufficient insulin.
The disease manifests itself in older people and can be sometimes controlled by changing lifestyle and diet.Assume that the cost of capital for the firm is 10%.We now have the information to draw the decision tree for this drug.
We will first draw the tree in figure 6.2, specifying the phases, the cash flows at each phase and theprobabilities:Figure 6.2: Decision Tree for Drug DevelopmentYear 1(today) of cash flows from each path, using the 10% cost of capital as the discount rate, in figure 6.3:Figure 6.3: Present Value of Cash Flows at End Nodes: Drug Development Tree

 Note that the present value of the cash flows from development after the third phase get discounted back an additional seven years (to reflect the time it takes to get through three phases).
In the last step in the process, we compute the expected values by working backwards through the tree and estimating the optimal action in each decision phase in figure 6.4:types of diabetes ($887.05 million in today’s dollars).

 There may one element in the last set of branches that may seem puzzling.
Note that the present value of developing the drug as a treatment for just type 2 diabetes is negative (-$97.43 million).
Why would the company still develop the drug? Because the alternative of abandoning the drug at the late stage in the process has an even more

 negative net present value (-$328.74 million).
Another way to see this is to look at the marginal effect of developing the drug just for type 2 diabetes.
Once the firm has expended the resources to take the firm through all three phases of testing, the testing cost becomes a sunk cost and is not a factor in the decision.8 The marginal cash flows from developing the drug after phase 3 yield a positive net present value of $451 million (in year 7 cash flows):Present value of developing drug to treat Type 2 diabetes in year 7 = -500 + 125(PV of annuity, 10%, 15 years) = $451 millionAt each stage in the decision tree, you make your judgments based upon the marginal cash flows at that juncture.
Rolling back the decision tree allows you to see what the value of the drug is at each phase in the process.There are several benefits that accrue from using decision trees and it is surprising that they are not used more often in analysis.be.marketing cost.

 8 It would be more accurate to consider only the costs of the first two phases as sunk, since by the end of phase 2, the firm knows that the drug is effective only against type 2 diabetes.
Even if we consider only the costs of the first 2 phases as sunk, it still makes sense on an expected value basis to continue to phase 3.

 In summary, decision trees provide a flexible and powerful approach for dealing with risk that occurs in phases, with decisions in each phase depending upon outcomes in the previous one.
In addition to providing us with measures of risk exposure, they also force us to think through how we will react to both adverse and positive outcomes that may occur at each phase.

 There are some types of risk that decision trees are capable of handling and others that they are not.
In particular, decision trees are best suited for risk that is sequential; the FDA process where approval occurs in phases is a good example.
Risks that affect an asset concurrently cannot be easily modeled in a decision tree.9 Looking back at the Boeing Super Jumbo jet example in the scenario analysis, for instance, the key risks that Boeing faces relate to Airbus developing its own version of a super-sized jet and growth in Asia.
If we had wanted to use a decision tree to model this investment, we would have had to make the assumption that one of these risks leads the other.
For instance, we could assume that Airbus will base its decision on whether to develop a large plane on growth in Asia; if growth is high, they are more likely to do it.
If, however, this assumption in unreasonable and the Airbus decision will be made while Boeing faces growth risk in Asia, a decision tree may not be feasible.

 As with scenario analysis, decision trees generally look at risk in terms of discrete outcomes.
Again, this is not a problem with the FDA approval process where there are only two outcomes – success or failure.
There is a much wider range of outcomes with most other risks and we have to create discrete categories for the outcomes to stay withinhe decision tree framework.
For instance, when looking at a market test, we may conclude that selling more than 100,000 units in a test market qualifies as a success, between 60,000 ad 100,000 units as an average outcome and below 60,000 as a failure.

 Assuming risk is sequential and can be categorized into discrete boxes, we are faced with estimation questions to which there may be no easy answers.
In particular, we have to estimate the cash flow under each outcome and the associated probability.
With the drug development example, we had to estimate the cost and the probability of success of each phase.
The advantage that we have when it comes to these estimates is that we can draw on empirical data on how frequently drugs that enter each phase make it to the next one and historical costs associated with drug testing.
To the extent that there may be wide differences across different phase 1 drugs in terms of success – some may be longer shots than others – there can still be errors that creep into decision trees.

 The expected value of a decision tree is heavily dependent upon the assumption that we will stay disciplined at the decision points in the tree.
In other words, if the optimal decision is to abandon if a test market fails and the expected value is computed, based on this assumption, the integrity of the process and the expected value will quickly fall apart, if managers decide to overlook the market testing failure and go with a full launch of the product anyway.

 Are decision trees an alternative or an addendum to discounted cash flow valuation? The question is an interesting one because there are some analysts who believe that decision trees, by factoring in the possibility of good and bad outcomes, are already risk adjusted.
In fact, they go on to make the claim that the right discount rate to use estimating present value in decision trees is the riskfree rate; using a risk adjusted discount rate, they argue, would be double counting the risk.
Barring a few exceptional circumstances, they are incorrect in their reasoning.a.
Expected values are not risk adjusted: Consider decision trees, where we estimate expected cash flows by looking at the possible outcomes and their probabilities of9 If we choose to model such risks in a decision tree, they have to be independent of each other.
In other

 occurrence.
The probability-weighted expected value that we obtain is not risk adjusted.
The only rationale that can be offered for using a risk free rate is that the risk embedded in the uncertain outcomes is asset-specific and will be diversified away, in which case the risk adjusted discount rate would be the riskfree rate.
In the FDA drug development example, for instance, this may be offered as the rationale for why we would use the risk free rate to discount cash flows for the first seven years, when the only the risk we face is drug approval risk.
After year 7, though, the risk is likely to contain a market element and the risk-adjusted rate will be higher than the risk free rate.

 b.
Double Counting of Risk: We do have to be careful about making sure that we don’t double count for risk in decision trees by using risk-adjusted discount rates that are set high to reflect the possibility of failure at the earlier phases.
One common example of this phenomenon is in venture capital valuation.
A conventional approach that venture capitalists have used to value young start-up companies is to estimate an exit value, based on projected earnings and a multiple of that earnings in the future, and to then discount the exit value at a target rate.
Using this approach, for instance, the value today for a firm that is losing money currently but is expected to make profits of $ 10 million in 5 years (when the earnings multiple at which it will be taken public is estimated to be 40) can be computed as follows (if the target rate is 35%):Value of the firm in 5 years = Earnings in year 5 * PE = 10 * 40 = $ 400 million Value of firm today = $ 400/ 1.355 = $89.20 millionNote, however, that the target rate is set at a high level (35%) because of the probability that this young firm will not make it to a public offering.
In fact, we could frame this as a simple decision tree in figure 6.5:words, the sequencing should not matter.Figure 6.5: Decision Tree for start-up firmmillion:Estimated Value = $89.20 =

 Solving for p, we estimate the probability of success at 44.85%.
With this estimate of probability in the decision tree, we would have arrived at the same value as the venture capitalist, assuming that we use the right discount rate.
Using the target rate of 35% as the discount rate in a decision tree would lead to a drastically lower value, because risk would have been counted twice.
Using the same reasoning, we can see why using a high discount rate in assessing the value of a bio-technology drug in a decision tree will under value the drug, especially if the discount rate already reflects the probability that the drug will not make it to commercial production.
If the risk of the approval process is specific to that drug.
and thus diversifiable, this would suggest that discount rates should be reasonable in decision tree analysis, even for drugs with very high likelihoods of not making it through the approval process.c.
The Right Discount Rate: If the right discount rate to use in a decision tree should reflect the non-diversifiable risk looking forward, it is not only possible but likely that discount rates we use will be different at different points in the tree.
For instance,

 extraordinary success at the test market stage may yield more predictable cash flows than an average test market outcome; this would lead us to use a lower discount rate to value the former and a higher discount rate to value the latter.
In the drug development example, it is possible that the expected cash flows, if the drug works for both types of diabetes, will be more stable than if is a treatment for only one type.
It would follow that a discount rate of 8% may be the right one for the first set of cash flows, whereas a 12% discount rate may be more appropriate for the second.Reviewing the discussion, decision trees are not alternatives to risk adjusted valuation.
Instead, they can be viewed as a different way of adjusting for discrete risk that may be difficult to bring into expected cash flows or into risk adjusted discount rates.

 If scenario analysis and decision trees are techniques that help us to assess the effects of discrete risk, simulations provide a way of examining the consequences of continuous risk.
To the extent that most risks that we face in the real world can generate hundreds of possible outcomes, a simulation will give us a fuller picture of the risk in an asset or investment.

 Unlike scenario analysis, where we look at the values under discrete scenarios, simulations allow for more flexibility in how we deal with uncertainty.
In its classic form, distributions of values are estimated for each parameter in the analysis (growth, market share, operating margin, beta etc.).
In each simulation, we draw one outcome from each distribution to generate a unique set of cashflows and value.
Across a large number of simulations, we can derive a distribution for the value of investment or an asset that will reflect the underlying uncertainty we face in estimating the inputs to the valuation.
The steps associated with running a simulation are as follows:

 1.
Determine “probabilistic” variables: In any analysis, there are potentially dozens of inputs, some of which are predictable and some of which are not.
Unlike scenario analysis and decision trees, where the number of variables that are changed and the potential outcomes have to be few in number, there is no constraint on how many

 variables can be allowed to vary in a simulation.
At least in theory, we can define probability distributions for each and every input in a valuation.
The reality, though, is that this will be time consuming and may not provide much of a payoff, especially for inputs that have only marginal impact on value.
Consequently, it makes sense to focus attention on a few variables that have a significant impact on value.2.
Define probability distributions for these variables: This is a key and the most difficult step in the analysis.
Generically, there are three ways in which we can go about defining probability distributions:a.
Historical data: For variables that have a long history and reliable data over that history, it is possible to use the historical data to develop distributions.
Assume, for instance, that you are trying to develop a distribution of expected changes in the long-term Treasury bond rate (to use as an input in investment analysis).
You could use the histogram in figure 6.6, based upon the annual changes in Treasury bond rates every year from 1928 to 2005, as the distribution for future changes.Implicit in this approach is the assumption that there have been no structural shifts in the market that will render the historical data unreliable.b.
Cross sectional data: In some cases, you may be able to substitute data on differences in a specific variable across existing investments that are similar to the investment being analyzed.
Consider two examples.
Assume that you are valuing a software firm and are concerned about the uncertainty in operating margins.
Figure 6.7 provides a distribution of pre-tax operating margins across software companies in 2006:to forecast, the historical and cross sectional data will be insufficient or unreliable.In these cases, you have to pick a statistical distribution that best captures the variability in the input and estimate the parameters for that distribution.
Thus, you may conclude that operating margins will be distributed uniformly, with a minimum of 4% and a maximum of 8% and that revenue growth is normally distributed with an expected value of 8% and a standard deviation of 6%.
Many simulation packages available for personal computers now provide a rich array of distributions to choose from, but picking the right distribution and the parameters for the distribution remains difficult for two reasons.
The first is that few inputs that we see in practice meet the stringent requirements that statistical distributions demand; revenue growth, for instance, cannot be normally distributed because the lowest value it can take on is -100%.
Consequently, we have to settle for statistical distributions that are close enough to the real distribution that the resulting errors will not wreak havoc on our conclusion.
The second is that the parameters still need to be estimated, once the distribution is picked.
For this, we can draw on historical or cross sectional data; for the revenue growth input, we can look at revenue growth in prior years or revenue growth rate differences across peer group companies.
The caveats about structural shifts that make historical data unreliable and peer group companies not being comparablecontinue to apply.The probability distributions for discrete for some inputs and continuous for others, be based upon historical data for some and statistical distributions for others.
Appendix 1 provides an overview of the statistical distributions that are most commonly used in simulations and their characteristics.

 3.
Check for correlation across variables: While it is tempting to jump to running simulations right after the distributions have been specified, it is important that we check for correlations across variables.
Assume, for instance, that you are developing probability distributions for both interest rates and inflation.
While both inputs may be critical in determining value, they are likely to be correlated with each other; high inflation is usually accompanied by high interest rates.
When there is strong correlation, positive or negative, across inputs, you have two choices.
One is to pick only one of the two inputs to vary; it makes sense to focus on the input that has the bigger impact onvalue.
The other is to build the correlation explicitly into the simulation; this does require more sophisticated simulation packages and adds more detail to the estimation process.
As with the distribution, the correlations can be estimated by looking at the past.

 4.
Run the simulation: For the first simulation, you draw one outcome from each distribution and compute the value based upon those outcomes.
This process can be repeated as many times as desired, though the marginal contribution of each simulation drops off as the number of simulations increases.
The number of simulations you run will be determined by the following:a.
Number of probabilistic inputs: The larger the number of inputs that have probability distributions attached to them, the greater will be the required number of simulations.b.
Characteristics of probability distributions: The greater the diversity of distributions in an analysis, the larger will be the number of required simulations.
Thus, the number of required simulations will be smaller in a simulation where all of the inputs have normal distributions than in one where some have normal distributions, some are based upon historical data distributions and some are discrete.c.
Range of outcomes: The greater the potential range of outcomes on each input, the greater will be the number of simulations.Most simulation packages allow users to run thousands of simulations, with little or no cost attached to increasing that number.
Given that reality, it is better to err on the side of too many simulations rather than too few.

 There have generally been two impediments to good simulations.
The first is informational: estimating distributions of values for each input into a valuation is difficult to do.
In other words, it is far easier to estimate an expected growth rate of 8% in revenues for the next 5 years than it is to specify the distribution of expected growth rates – the type of distribution, parameters of that distribution – for revenues.
The second is computational; until the advent of personal computers, simulations tended to be too time and resource intensive for the typical analysis.
Both these constraints have eased in recent years and simulations have become more feasible.

 Running a simulation is simplest for firms that consider the same kind of projects repeatedly.
These firms can use their experience from similar projects that are already in operation to estimate expected values for new projects.
The Home Depot, for instance, analyzes dozens of new home improvement stores every year.
It also has hundreds of stores in operation10, at different stages in their life cycles; some of these stores have been in operation for more than 10 years and others have been around only for a couple of years.
Thus, when forecasting revenues for a new store, the Home Depot can draw on this rich database to make its estimates more precise.
The firm has a reasonable idea of how long it takes a new store to become established and how store revenues change as the store ages and new stores open close by.

 There are other cases where experience can prove useful for estimating revenues and expenses on a new investment.
An oil company, in assessing whether to put up an oil rig, comes into the decision with a clear sense of what the costs are of putting up a rig, and how long it will take for the rig to be productive.
Similarly, a pharmaceutical firm, when introducing a new drug, can bring to its analysis its experience with other drugs in the past, how quickly such drugs are accepted and prescribed by doctors, and how responsive revenues are to pricing policy.
We are not suggesting that the experience these firms have had in analyzing similar projects in the past removes uncertainty about the project from the analysis.
The Home Depot is still exposed to considerable risk on each new store that it analyzes today, but the experience does make the estimation process easier and the estimation error smaller than it would be for a firm that is assessing a unique project.

 Assume that the Home Depot is analyzing a new home improvement store that will follow its traditional format11.
There are several estimates the Home Depot needs to make when analyzing a new store.
Perhaps the most important is the likely revenues at the store.
Given that the Home Depot’s store sizes are similar across locations, the firm

 10 At the end of 2005, the Home Depot had 743 Home Depot stores in operation, 707 of which were in the United States.
11 A typical Home Depot store has store space of about 100,000 square feet and carries a wide range of home improvement products, from hardware to flooring.can get an idea of the expected revenues by looking at revenues at their existing stores.
Figure 6.8 summarizes the distribution12 of annual revenues at existing stores in 2005:This distribution not only yields an expected revenue per store of about $ 44 million, but also provides a measure of the uncertainty associated with the estimate, in the form of a standard deviation in revenues per store.

 The second key input is the operating margin that the Home Depot expects to generate at this store.
While the margins are fairly similar across all of its existing stores, there are significant differences in margins across different building supply retailers, reflecting their competitive strengths or weaknesses.
Figure 6.9 summarizes differences in pre-tax operating margins across building supply retailers:12 This distribution is a hypothetical one, since the Home Depot does not provide this information to outsiders.
It does have the information internally.

 Finally, the store’s future revenues will be tied to an estimate of expected growth, which we will assume will be strongly influenced by overall economic growth in the United States.
To get a measure of this growth, we looked at the distribution of real GDP growth from 1925 to 2005 in figure 6.10:the expected inflation rate and the growth rate in real GDP.
We will assume that the expected inflation rate is 2%.We can compute the value of this store to the Home Depot, based entirely upon the expected values of each variable:Expected Base-year Revenue = $ 44 millionExpected Base-year After-tax Cash flow = (Revenue * Pretax Margin – Nonoperating expenses) (1- tax rate ) = (44*.09 – 1.5) (1- .4) = $1.476 millionExpected growth rate = GDP growth rate + Expected inflation = 3% + 2% = 5%The risk adjusted value for this store is $11.53 million.We then did a simulation with 10,000 runs, based upon the probability distributions for each of the inputs.15 The resulting values are graphed in figure 6.11:

 13 In the modified version, we smoothed out the distribution to fill in the missing intervals and moved the peak of the distribution slightly to the left (to 3-4% from 4-5%) reflecting the larger size of the economy today.
14 The equation presented here is the equation for the present value of a growing annuity.
15 We used Crystal Ball as the computational program.
Crystal Ball is a simulation program produced by Decisioneering Inc.)The key statistics on the values obtained across the 10,000 runs are summarized below:A well-done simulation provides us with more than just an expected value for anasset or investment.expected growth rates that are obtained from services such Zack’s or IBES, which report analysts’ consensus estimates.estimates of value.

 Note that there are two claims about simulations that we are unwilling to make.
The first is that simulations yield better estimates of expected value than conventional risk adjusted value models.
In fact, the expected values from simulations should be fairly close to the expected value that we would obtain using the expected values for each of the inputs (rather than the entire distribution).
The second is that simulations, by providing estimates of the expected value and the distribution in that value, lead to better decisions.
This may not always be the case since the benefits that decision-makers get by getting a fuller picture of the uncertainty in value in a risky asset may be more than offset by misuse of that risk measure.
As we will argue later in this chapter, it is all too common for risk to be double counted in simulations and for decisions to be based upon the wrong type of risk.

 To use simulations as a tool in risk analysis, we have to introduce a constraint, which, if violated, creates very large costs for the firm and perhaps even causes its demise.
We can then evaluate the effectiveness of risk hedging tools by examining the likelihood that the constraint will be violated with each one and weighing that off against the cost of the tool.
In this section, we will consider some common constraints that are introduced into simulations.Book Value Constraints

 The book value of equity is an accounting construct and, by itself, means little.
Firms like Microsoft and Google trade at market values that are several times their book values.
At the other extreme, there are firms that trade at half their book value or less.
In fact, there are several hundred firms in the United States, some with significant market values that have negative book values for equity.
There are two types of restrictions on book value of equity that may call for risk hedging.insurance companies are required to maintain book equity as a fraction of loans or other assets at or above a floor ratio specified by the authorities.
Firms that violate these capital constraints can be taken over by the regulatory authorities with the equity investors losing everything if that occurs.
Not surprisingly, financial service firms not only keep a close eye on their book value of equity (and the related ratios) but are also conscious of the possibility that the risk in their investments or positions can manifest itself as a drop in book equity.
In fact, value at risk or VAR, which we will examine in the next chapter, represents the efforts by financial service firms to understand the potential risks in their investments and to be ready for the possibility of a catastrophic outcome, though the probability of it occurring might be very small.
By simulating the values of their investments under a variety of scenarios, they can identify not only the possibility of falling below the regulatory ratios but also look for ways of hedging against this event occurring.
The payoff to risk hedging then manifests itself as a decline in or even an elimination of the probability that the firm will violate a regulatoryconstraint.barred from paying dividends.
Even in the United States, lenders to firms can have loan covenants that allow them to gain at least partial control of a firm if its book value of equity turns negative.
As with regulatory capital restrictions, we can use simulations to assess the probability of a negative book value for equity and to protect against it.Earnings and Cash flow Constraints

 Earnings and cash flow constraints can be either internally or externally imposed.
In some firms managers of firms may decide that the consequences of reporting a loss or not meeting analysis estimates of earnings are so dire, including perhaps the loss of their jobs, that they are willing to expend the resources on risk hedging products to prevent this from happening.
The payoff from hedging risk then has nothing to do with firm value maximization and much to do with managerial compensation and incentives.
In other firms, the constraints on earnings and cashflows can be externally imposed.
For instance, loan covenants can be related to earnings outcomes.
Not only can the interest rate on the loan be tied to whether a company makes money or not, but the control of the firm can itself shift to lenders in some cases if the firm loses money.
In either case, we can use simulations to both assess the likelihood that these constraints will be violated and to examine the effect of risk hedging products on this likelihood.Market Value Constraints

 In discounted cash flow valuation, the value of the firm is computed as a going concern, by discounting expected cashflows at a risk-adjusted discount rate.
Deducting debt from this estimate yields equity value.
The possibility and potential costs of not being able to meet debt payments is considered only peripherally in the discount rate.
In reality, the costs of not meeting contractual obligations can be substantial.
In fact, these costs are generally categorized as indirect bankruptcy costs and could include the loss of customers, tighter supplier credit and higher employee turnover.
The perception that a firm is in trouble can lead to further trouble.
By allowing us to compare the value of a business to its outstanding claims in all possible scenarios (rather than just the most likely one), simulations allow us to not only quantify the likelihood of distress but also build inthe cost of indirect bankruptcy costs into valuation.
In effect, we can explicitly model the effect of distress on expected cash flows and discount rates.

 The use of simulations in investment analysis was first suggested in an article by David Hertz in the Harvard Business Review.16 He argued that using probability distributions for input variables, rather than single best estimates, would yield more informative output.
In the example that he provided in the paper, he used simulations to compare the distributions of returns of two investments; the investment with the higher expected return also had a higher chance of losing money (which was viewed as an indicator of its riskiness).
In the aftermath, there were several analysts who jumped on the simulation bandwagon, with mixed results.
In recent years, there has been a resurgence in interest in simulations as a tool for risk assessment, especially in the context of using and valuing derivatives.
There are several key issues, though, that we have to deal with in the context of using simulations in risk assessment:

 a.
Garbage in, garbage out: For simulations to have value, the distributions chosen for the inputs should be based upon analysis and data, rather than guesswork.
It is worth noting that simulations yield great-looking output, even when the inputs are random.
Unsuspecting decision makers may therefore be getting meaningless pictures of the risk in an investment.
It is also worth noting that simulations require more than a passing knowledge of statistical distributions and their characteristics; analysts who cannot assess the difference between normal and lognormal distributions should not be doing simulations.b.
Real data may not fit distributions: The problem with the real world is that the data seldom fits the stringent requirements of statistical distributions.
Using probability distributions that bear little resemblance to the true distribution underlying an input variable will yield misleading results.c.
Non-stationary distributions: Even when the data fits a statistical distribution or where historical data distributions are available, shifts in the market structure can lead to shifts16 Hertz, D., 1964, Risk Analysis in Capital Investment, Harvard Business Review.

 in the distributions as well.
In some cases, this can change the form of the distribution and in other cases, it can change the parameters of the distribution.
Thus, the mean and variance estimated from historical data for an input that is normally distributed may change for the next period.
What we would really like to use in simulations, but seldom can assess, are forward looking probability distributions.

 d.
Changing correlation across inputs: Earlier in this chapter, we noted that correlation across input variables can be modeled into simulations.
However, this works only if the correlations remain stable and predictable.
To the extent that correlations between input variables change over time, it becomes far more difficult to model them.

 In our discussion of decision trees, we referred to the common misconception that decision trees are risk adjusted because they consider the likelihood of adverse events.
The same misconception is prevalent in simulations, where the argument is that the cash flows from simulations are somehow risk adjusted because of the use of probability distributions and that the riskfree rate should be used in discounting these cash flows.
With one exception, this argument does not make sense.
Looking across simulations, the cash flows that we obtain are expected cash flows and are not risk adjusted.
Consequently, we should be discounting these cash flows at a risk-adjusted rate.

 The exception occurs when you use the standard deviation in values from a simulation as a measure of investment or asset risk and make decisions based upon that measure.
In this case, using a risk-adjusted discount rate will result in a double counting of risk.
Consider a simple example.
Assume that you are trying to choose between two assets, both of which you have valued using simulations and risk adjusted discount rates.
Table 6.3 summarizes your findings:

 Note that you view asset B to be riskier and have used a higher discount rate to compute value.
If you now proceed to reject asset B, because the standard deviation is higher across the simulated values, you would be penalizing it twice.
You can redo the simulations using the riskfree rate as the discount rate for both assets, but a note of caution needs to be introduced.
If we then base our choice between these assets on the standard deviation in simulated values, we are assuming that all risk matters in investment choice, rather than only the risk that cannot be diversified away.
Put another way, we may end up rejecting an asset because it has a high standard deviation in simulated values, even though adding that asset to a portfolio may result in little additional risk (because much of its risk can be diversified away).

 This is not to suggest that simulations are not useful to us in understanding risk.
Looking at the variance of the simulated values around the expected value provides a visual reminder that we are estimating value in an uncertain environment.
It is also conceivable that we can use it as a decision tool in portfolio management in choosing between two stocks that are equally undervalued but have different value distributions.
The stock with the less volatile value distribution may be considered a better investment than another stock with a more volatile value distribution.Now that we have looked at scenario analysis, decision trees and simulations, we can consider not only when each one is appropriate but also how these approaches complement or replace risk adjusted value approaches.Assuming that we decide to use a probabilistic approach to assess risk and could choose between scenario analysis, decision trees and simulations, which one should we pick? The answer will depend upon how you plan to use the output and what types of risk you are facing:1.
Selective versus Full Risk Analysis: In the best-case/worst-case scenario analysis, we look at only three scenarios (the best case, the most likely case and the worst case) and ignore all other scenarios.
Even when we consider multiple scenarios, we will not have a

 complete assessment of all possible outcomes from risky investments or assets.
With decision trees and simulations, we attempt to consider all possible outcomes.
In decision trees, we try to accomplish this by converting continuous risk into a manageable set of possible outcomes.
With simulations, we use probability distributions to capture all possible outcomes.
Put in terms of probability, the sum of the probabilities of the scenarios we examine in scenario analysis can be less than one, whereas the sum of the probabilities of outcomes in decision trees and simulations has to equal one.
As a consequence, we can compute expected values across outcomes in the latter, using the probabilities as weights, and these expected values are comparable to the single estimate risk adjusted values that we talked about in the last chapter.

 2.
Type of Risk: As noted above, scenario analysis and decision trees are generally built around discrete outcomes in risky events whereas simulations are better suited for continuous risks.
Focusing on just scenario analysis and decision trees, the latter are better suited for sequential risks, since risk is considered in phases, whereas the former is easier to use when risks occur concurrently.

 3.
Correlation across risks: If the various risks that an investment is exposed to are correlated, simulations allow for explicitly modeling these correlations (assuming that you can estimate and forecast them).
In scenario analysis, we can deal with correlations subjectively by creating scenarios that allow for them; the high (low) interest rate scenario will also include slower (higher) economic growth.
Correlated risks are difficult to model in decision trees.Table 6.4 summarizes the relationship between risk type and the probabilistic approachused:Table 6.4: Risk Type and Probabilistic Approaches

 Finally, the quality of the information will be a factor in your choice of approach.
Since simulations are heavily dependent upon being able to assess probability distributions and parameters, they work best in cases where there is substantial historical and cross sectional data available that can be used to make these assessments.
With decision trees, you need estimates of the probabilities of the outcomes at each chance node, making them best suited for risks that can be assessed either using past data or population characteristics.
Thus, it should come as no surprise that when confronted with new and unpredictable risks, analysts continue to fall back on scenario analysis, notwithstanding its slapdash and subjective ways of dealing with risk.

 As we noted in our discussion of both decision trees and simulations, these approaches can be used as either complements to or substitutes for risk-adjusted value.
Scenario analysis, on the other hand, will always be a complement to risk adjusted value, since it does not look at the full spectrum of possible outcomes.

 When any of these approaches are used as complements to risk adjusted value, the caveats that we offered earlier in the chapter continue to apply and bear repeating.
All of these approaches use expected rather than risk adjusted cash flows and the discount rate that is used should be a risk-adjusted discount rate; the riskfree rate cannot be used to discount expected cash flows.
In all three approaches, though, we still preserve the flexibility to change the risk adjusted discount rate for different outcomes.
Since all of these approaches will also provide a range for estimated value and a measure of variability (in terms of value at the end nodes in a decision tree or as a standard deviation in value in a simulation), it is important that we do not double count for risk.
In other words, it is patently unfair to risky investments to discount their cash flows back at a risk- adjusted rate (in simulations and decision trees) and to then reject them because the variability in value is high.

 Both simulations and decision trees can be used as alternatives to risk adjusted valuation, but there are constraints on the process.
The first is that the cash flows will be discounted back at a riskfree rate to arrive at value.
The second is that we now use the measure of variability in values that we obtain in both these approaches as a measure of

 risk in the investment.
Comparing two assets with the same expected value (obtained with riskless rates as discount rates) from a simulation, we will pick the one with the lower variability in simulated values as the better investment.
If we do this, we are assuming that all of the risks that we have built into the simulation are relevant for the investment decision.
In effect, we are ignoring the line drawn between risks that could have been diversified away in a portfolio and asset-specific risk on which much of modern finance is built.
For an investor considering investing all of his or her wealth in one asset, this should be reasonable.
For a portfolio manager comparing two risky stocks that he or she is considering adding to a diversified portfolio or for a publicly traded company evaluating two projects, it can yield misleading results; the rejected stock or project with the higher variance in simulated values may be uncorrelated with the other investments in the portfolio and thus have little marginal risk.

 The use of probabilistic approaches has become more common with the surge in data availability and computing power.
It is not uncommon now to see a capital budgeting analysis, with a twenty to thirty additional scenarios, or a Monte Carlo simulation attached to an equity valuation.
In fact, the ease with which simulations can be implemented has allowed its use in a variety of new markets.As we will see in the next chapter, simulations are a key components of Value at Risk and other risk management tools used, especially in firms that have to deal with risk in financial assets.

 Estimating the risk adjusted value for a risky asset or investment may seem like an exercise in futility.
After all, the value is a function of the assumptions that we make about how the risk will unfold in the future.
With probabilistic approaches to risk assessment, we estimate not only an expected value but also get a sense of the range of possible outcomes for value, across good and bad scenarios.

 Every statistics book provides a listing of statistical distributions, with their properties, but browsing through these choices can be frustrating to anyone without a statistical background, for two reasons.
First, the choices seem endless, with dozens of distributions competing for your attention, with little or no intuitive basis for differentiating between them.
Second, the descriptions tend to be abstract and emphasize statistical properties such as the moments, characteristic functions and cumulative distributions.
In this appendix, we will focus on the aspects of distributions that are most useful when analyzing raw data and trying to fit the right distribution to that data.When confronted with data that needs to be characterized by a distribution, it is

 best to start with the raw data and answer four basic questions about the data that can help in the characterization.
The first relates to whether the data can take on only discrete values or whether the data is continuous; whether a new pharmaceutical drug gets FDA approval or not is a discrete value but the revenues from the drug represent a continuous variable.
The second looks at the symmetry of the data and if there is asymmetry, which direction it lies in; in other words, are positive and negative outliers equally likely or is one more likely than the other.
The third question is whether there are upper or lower limits on the data;; there are some data items like revenues that cannot be lower than zero whereas there are others like operating margins that cannot exceed a value (100%).
The final and related question relates to the likelihood of observing extreme values in the distribution; in some data, the extreme values occur very infrequently whereas in others,they occur more often.Is the data discrete or continuous?

 The first and most obvious categorization of data should be on whether the data is restricted to taking on only discrete values or if it is continuous.
Consider the inputs into a typical project analysis at a firm.
Most estimates that go into the analysis come from distributions that are continuous; market size, market share and profit margins, for instance, are all continuous variables.
There are some important risk factors, though, that

 can take on only discrete forms, including regulatory actions and the threat of a terrorist attack; in the first case, the regulatory authority may dispense one of two or more decisions which are specified up front and in the latter, you are subjected to a terrorist attack or you are not.

 With discrete data, the entire distribution can either be developed from scratch or the data can be fitted to a pre-specified discrete distribution.
With the former, there are two steps to building the distribution.
The first is identifying the possible outcomes and the second is to estimate probabilities to each outcome.
As we noted in the text, we can draw on historical data or experience as well as specific knowledge about the investment being analyzed to arrive at the final distribution.
This process is relatively simple to accomplish when there are a few outcomes with a well-established basis for estimating probabilities but becomes more tedious as the number of outcomes increases.
If it is difficult or impossible to build up a customized distribution, it may still be possible fit the data to one of the following discrete distributions:trial sizes.skewed for probabilities greater than 50%.17from 1 to 10.17 As the number of trials increases and the probability of success is close to 0.5, the binomial distribution converges on the normal distribution.Figure 6A.3: Geometric Distributionface cards in a hand of ten can be estimated.
Figure 6A.4 provides a graph of the hypergeometric distribution:

 With continuous data, we cannot specify all possible outcomes, since they are too numerous to list, but we have two choices.
The first is to convert the continuous data into a discrete form and then go through the same process that we went through for discrete distributions of estimating probabilities.
For instance, we could take a variable such as market share and break it down into discrete blocks – market share between 3% and 3.5%, between 3.5% and 4% and so on – and consider the likelihood that we will fall into each block.
The second is to find a continuous distribution that best fits the data and to specify the parameters of the distribution.
The rest of the appendix will focus on how to make these choices.How symmetric is the data?There are some datasets that exhibit symmetry, i.e., the upside is mirrored by the downside.
The symmetric distribution that most practitioners have familiarity with is the normal distribution, sown in Figure 6A.6, for a range of parameters:The last two conditions show up when we compute the parameters of the normal distribution: the symmetry of deviations leads to zero skewness and the low probabilities of large deviations from the central value reveal themselves in no kurtosis.

 There is a cost we pay, though, when we use a normal distribution to characterize data that is non-normal since the probability estimates that we obtain will be misleading and can do more harm than good.
One obvious problem is when the data is asymmetric but another potential problem is when the probabilities of large deviations from the

 central value do not drop off as precipitously as required by the normal distribution.
In statistical language, the actual distribution of the data has fatter tails than the normal.
While all of symmetric distributions in the family are like the normal in terms of the upside mirroring the downside, they vary in terms of shape, with some distributions having fatter tails than the normal and the others more accentuated peaks.
These distributions are characterized as leptokurtic and you can consider two examples.
One is the logistic distribution, which has longer tails and a higher kurtosis (1.2, as compared to 0 for the normal distribution) and the other are Cauchy distributions, which also exhibit symmetry and higher kurtosis and are characterized by a scale variable that determines how fat the tails are.
Figure 6A.7 present a series of Cauchy distributions that exhibit the bias towards fatter tails or more outliers than the normal distribution.As the probabilities of extreme values increases relative to the central value, the distribution will flatten out.
At its limit, assuming that the data stays symmetric and we put limits on the extreme values on both sides, we end up with the uniform distribution,shown in figure 6A.8:

 Most data does not exhibit symmetry and instead skews towards either very large positive or very large negative values.
If the data is positively skewed, one common choice is the lognormal distribution, which is typically characterized by three parameters: a shape (σ or sigma), a scale (µ or median) and a shift parameter ( ).
When m=0 and =1, you have the standard lognormal distribution and when =0, the distribution requires only scale and sigma parameters.
As the sigma rises, the peak of the distribution shifts to the left and the skewness in the distribution increases.
Figure 6A.9 graphs lognormal distributions for a range of parameters:Another is an extreme value distribution, which can also be altered to generate both positive and negative skewness, depending upon whether the extreme outcomes are the maximum (positive) or minimum (negative) values (see Figure 6A.13)Are there upper or lower limits on data values?

 There are often natural limits on the values that data can take on.
As we noted earlier, the revenues and the market value of a firm cannot be negative and the profit margin cannot exceed 100%.
Using a distribution that does not constrain the values to these limits can create problems.
For instance, using a normal distribution to describe profit margins can sometimes result in profit margins that exceed 100%, since the distribution has no limits on either the downside or the upside.

 When data is constrained, the questions that needs to be answered are whether the constraints apply on one side of the distribution or both, and if so, what the limits on values are.
Once these questions have been answered, there are two choices.
One is to find a continuous distribution that conforms to these constraints.
For instance, the lognormal distribution can be used to model data, such as revenues and stock prices that are constrained to be never less than zero.
For data that have both upper and lower limits, you could use the uniform distribution, if the probabilities of the outcomes are even across outcomes or a triangular distribution (if the data is clustered around a central value).
Figure 6A.14 presents a triangular distribution:Figure 6A.14: Triangular DistributionHow likely are you to see extreme values of data, relative to the middle values?

 As we noted in the earlier section, a key consideration in what distribution to use to describe the data is the likelihood of extreme values for the data, relative to the middle value.
In the case of the normal distribution, this likelihood is small and it increases as you move to the logistic and Cauchy distributions.
While it may often be more realistic to use the latter to describe real world data, the benefits of a better distribution fit have to be weighed off against the ease with which parameters can be estimated from the normal distribution.
Consequently, it may make sense to stay with the normal distribution for symmetric data, unless the likelihood of extreme values increases above a threshold.The same considerations apply for skewed distributions, though the concern will generally be more acute for the skewed side of the distribution.
In other words, with positively skewed distribution, the question of which distribution to use will depend uponhow much more likely large positive values are than large negative values, with the fit ranging from the lognormal to the exponential.In summary, the question of which distribution best fits data cannot be answered without looking at whether the data is discrete or continuous, symmetric or asymmetric and where the outliers lie.
Figure 6A.15 summarizes the choices in a chart.The simplest test for distributional fit is visual with a comparison of the histogram of the actual data to the fitted distribution.
Consider figure 6A.16, where we report the distribution of current price earnings ratios for US stocks in early 2007, with a normal distribution superimposed on it.Figure 6A.16: Current PE Ratios for US Stocks – January 2007

 A slightly more sophisticated test is to compute the moments of the actual data distribution – the mean, the standard deviation, skewness and kurtosis – and to examine them for fit to the chosen distribution.
With the price-earnings data above, for instance, the moments of the distribution and key statistics are summarized in table 6A.1:

 The typical tests for goodness of fit compare the actual distribution function of the data with the cumulative distribution function of the distribution that is being used to characterize the data, to either accept the hypothesis that the chosen distribution fits the data or to reject it.
Not surprisingly, given its constant use, there are more tests for normality than for any other distribution.
The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test is one of the oldest tests of fit for distributions18, dating back to 1967.
Improved versions of the tests include the Shapiro-Wilk and Anderson-Darling tests.
Applying these tests to the current PE ratio yields the unsurprising result that the hypothesis that current PE ratios are drawn from a normal distribution is roundly rejected:a.
Lilliefors Significance CorrectionThere are graphical tests of normality, where probability plots can be used to assess the hypothesis that the data is drawn from a normal distribution.
Figure 6A.17 illustrates this, using current PE ratios as the data set.using current PE ratios as the data set.18 The Kolgomorov-Smirnov test can be used to see if the data fits a normal, lognormal, Weibull, exponential or logistic distribution.

 Raw data is almost never as well behaved as we would like it to be.
Consequently, fitting a statistical distribution to data is part art and part science, requiring compromises along the way.
The key to good data analysis is maintaining a balance between getting a good distributional fit and preserving ease of estimation, keeping in mind that the ultimate objective is that the analysis should lead to better decision.
In particular, you may decide to settle for a distribution that less completely fits the data over one that more completely fits it, simply because estimating the parameters may be easier to do with the former.
This may explain the overwhelming dependence on the normal distribution in practice, notwithstanding the fact that most data do not meet the criteria needed for the distribution to fit.

 What is the most I can lose on this investment? This is a question that almost every investor who has invested or is considering investing in a risky asset asks at some point in time.
Value at Risk tries to provide an answer, at least within a reasonable bound.
In fact, it is misleading to consider Value at Risk, or VaR as it is widely known, to be an alternative to risk adjusted value and probabilistic approaches.
After all, it borrows liberally from both.
However, the wide use of VaR as a tool for risk assessment, especially in financial service firms, and the extensive literature that has developed around it, push us to dedicate this chapter to its examination.

 We begin the chapter with a general description of VaR and the view of risk that underlies its measurement, and examine the history of its development and applications.
We then consider the various estimation issues and questions that have come up in the context of measuring VAR and how analysts and researchers have tried to deal with them.
Next, we evaluate variations that have been developed on the common measure, in some cases to deal with different types of risk and in other cases, as a response to the limitations of VaR.
In the final section, we evaluate how VaR fits into and contrasts with the other risk assessment measures we developed in the last two chapters.

 In its most general form, the Value at Risk measures the potential loss in value of a risky asset or portfolio over a defined period for a given confidence interval.
Thus, if the VaR on an asset is $ 100 million at a one-week, 95% confidence level, there is a only a 5% chance that the value of the asset will drop more than $ 100 million over any given week.
In its adapted form, the measure is sometimes defined more narrowly as the possible loss in value from “normal market risk” as opposed to all risk, requiring that we draw distinctions between normal and abnormal risk as well as between market and non-market risk.While Value at Risk can be used by any entity to measure its risk exposure, it is used most often by commercial and investment banks to capture the potential loss invalue of their traded portfolios from adverse market movements over a specified period; this can then be compared to their available capital and cash reserves to ensure that the losses can be covered without putting the firms at risk.Taking a closer look at Value at Risk, there are clearly key aspects that mirror our discussion of simulations in the last chapter:In the sections that follow, we will begin by looking at the history of the development of this measure, ways in which the VaR can be computed, limitations of and variations on the basic measures and how VaR fits into the broader spectrum of risk assessment approaches.While the term “Value at Risk” was not widely used prior to the mid 1990s, the origins of the measure lie further back in time.
The mathematics that underlie VaR were

 largely developed in the context of portfolio theory by Harry Markowitz and others, though their efforts were directed towards a different end – devising optimal portfolios for equity investors.
In particular, the focus on market risks and the effects of the co- movements in these risks are central to how VaR is computed.The impetus for the use of VaR measures, though, came from the crises that beset

 financial service firms over time and the regulatory responses to these crises.
The first regulatory capital requirements for banks were enacted in the aftermath of the Great Depression and the bank failures of the era, when the Securities Exchange Act established the Securities Exchange Commission (SEC) and required banks to keep their borrowings below 2000% of their equity capital.
In the decades thereafter, banks devised risk measures and control devices to ensure that they met these capital requirements.
With the increased risk created by the advent of derivative markets and floating exchange rates in the early 1970s, capital requirements were refined and expanded in the SEC’s Uniform Net Capital Rule (UNCR) that was promulgated in 1975, which categorized the financial assets that banks held into twelve classes, based upon risk, and required different capital requirements for each, ranging from 0% for short term treasuries to 30% for equities.
Banks were required to report on their capital calculations in quarterly statements that were titled Financial and Operating Combined Uniform Single (FOCUS)reports.

 The first regulatory measures that evoke Value at Risk, though, were initiated in 1980, when the SEC tied the capital requirements of financial service firms to the losses that would be incurred, with 95% confidence over a thirty-day interval, in different security classes; historical returns were used to compute these potential losses.
Although the measures were described as haircuts and not as Value or Capital at Risk, it was clear the SEC was requiring financial service firms to embark on the process of estimating one- month 95% VaRs and hold enough capital to cover the potential losses.

 At about the same time, the trading portfolios of investment and commercial banks were becoming larger and more volatile, creating a need for more sophisticated and timely risk control measures.
Ken Garbade at Banker’s Trust, in internal documents, presented sophisticated measures of Value at Risk in 1986 for the firm’s fixed income portfolios, based upon the covariance in yields on bonds of different maturities.
By the

 early 1990s, many financial service firms had developed rudimentary measures of Value at Risk, with wide variations on how it was measured.
In the aftermath of numerous disastrous losses associated with the use of derivatives and leverage between 1993 and 1995, culminating with the failure of Barings, the British investment bank, as a result of unauthorized trading in Nikkei futures and options by Nick Leeson, a young trader in Singapore, firms were ready for more comprehensive risk measures.
In 1995, J.P.
Morgan provided public access to data on the variances of and covariances across various security and asset classes, that it had used internally for almost a decade to manage risk, and allowed software makers to develop software to measure risk.
It titled the service “RiskMetrics” and used the term Value at Risk to describe the risk measure that emerged from the data.
The measure found a ready audience with commercial and investment banks, and the regulatory authorities overseeing them, who warmed to its intuitive appeal.
In the last decade, VaR has becomes the established measure of risk exposure in financial service firms and has even begun to find acceptance in non-financial servicefirms.

 There are three basic approaches that are used to compute Value at Risk, though there are numerous variations within each approach.
The measure can be computed analytically by making assumptions about return distributions for market risks, and by using the variances in and covariances across these risks.
It can also be estimated by running hypothetical portfolios through historical data or from Monte Carlo simulations.
In this section, we describe and compare the approaches.1Since Value at Risk measures the probability that the value of an asset or portfolio will drop below a specified value in a particular time period, it should be relatively simple to compute if we can derive a probability distribution of potential values.
That is1 For a comprehensive overview of Value at Risk and its measures, look at the Jorion, P., 2001, Value at Risk: The New Benchmark for Managing Financial Risk, McGraw Hill.
For a listing of every possible reference to the measure, try www.GloriaMundi.org.basically what we do in the variance-covariance method, an approach that has the benefit of simplicity but is limited by the difficulties associated with deriving probability distributions.General DescriptionConsider a very simple example.
Assume that you are assessing the VaR for a

 single asset, where the potential values are normally distributed with a mean of $ 120 million and an annual standard deviation of $ 10 million.
With 95% confidence, you can assess that the value of this asset will not drop below $ 80 million (two standard deviations below from the mean) or rise about $120 million (two standard deviations above the mean) over the next year.2 When working with portfolios of assets, the same reasoning will apply but the process of estimating the parameters is complicated by the fact that the assets in the portfolio often move together.
As we noted in our discussion of portfolio theory in chapter 4, the central inputs to estimating the variance of a portfolio are the covariances of the pairs of assets in the portfolio; in a portfolio of 100 assets, there will be 49,500 covariances that need to be estimated, in addition to the 100 individual asset variances.
Clearly, this is not practical for large portfolios with shifting asset positions.It is to simplify this process that we map the risk in the individual investments in the portfolio to more general market risks, when we compute Value at Risk, and then estimate the measure based on these market risk exposures.
There are generally four steps involved in this process:matching cash flows:2 The 95% confidence intervals translate into 1.96 standard deviations on either side of the mean.
With a 90% confidence interval, we would use 1.65 standard deviations and a 99% confidence interval would require 2.33 standard deviations.The first coupon matches up to a one-year zero coupon bond with a face value of C, the second coupon with a two-year zero coupon bond with a face value of C and so until the tenth cash flow which is matched up with a 10-year zero coupon bond with a face value of FV (corresponding to the face value of the 10-year bond) plus C.
The mapping process is more complicated for more complex assets such as stocks and options, but the basic intuition does not change.
We try to map every financial asset into a set of instruments representing the underlying market risks.
Why bother with mapping? Instead of having to estimate the variances and covariances of thousands of individual assets, we estimate those statistics for the common market risk instruments that these assets are exposed to; there are far fewer of the latter than the former.
The resulting matrix can be used to measure the Value at Risk of any asset that is exposed to a combination of these market risks.

 Appendix 7.1 provides an illustration of the VaR computation for a six-month dollar/euro forward contract.
The standardized instruments that underlie the contract are identified as the six month riskfree securities in the dollar and the euro and the spot dollar/euro exchange rate, the dollar values of the instruments computed and the VaR is estimated based upon the covariances between the three instruments.

 Implicit in the computation of the VaR in step 4 are assumptions about how returns on the standardized risk measures are distributed.
The most convenient assumption both from a computational standpoint and in terms of estimating probabilities is normality and it should come as no surprise that many VaR measures are based upon some variant of that assumption.
If, for instance, we assume that each market risk factor has normally distributed returns, we ensure that that the returns on any portfolio that is exposed to multiple market risk factors will also have a normal distribution.
Even those VaR approaches that allow for non-normal return distributions for individual risk factors find ways of ending up with normal distributions for final portfolio values.The RiskMetrics Contribution

 As we noted in an earlier section, the term Value at Risk and the usage of the measure can be traced back to the RiskMetrics service offered by J.P.
Morgan in 1995.
The key contribution of the service was that it made the variances in and covariances across asset classes freely available to anyone who wanted to access them, thus easing the task for anyone who wanted to compute the Value at Risk analytically for a portfolio.
Publications by J.P.
Morgan in 1996 describe the assumptions underlying their computation of VaR:33 RiskMetrics – Technical Document, J.P.
Morgan, December 17, 1996; Zangari, P., 1996, An Improved Methodology for Computing VaR, J.P.
Morgan RiskMetrics Monitor, Second Quarter 1996.standardized return, whereas the same return following a period of low volatility will yield an abnormally high standardized return.

 The focus on normalized standardized returns exposed the VaR computation to the risk of more frequent large outliers than would be expected with a normal distribution.
In a subsequent variation, the RiskMetrics approach was extended to cover normal mixture distributions, which allow for the assignment of higher probabilities for outliers.
Figure 7.1 contrasts the two distributions:AssessmentThe strength of the Variance-Covariance approach is that the Value at Risk is simple to compute, once you have made an assumption about the distribution of returns and inputted the means, variances and covariances of returns.
In the estimation process, though, lie the three key weaknesses of the approach:been directed at dealing with these critiques.

 First, a host of researchers have examined how best to compute VaR with assumptions other than the standardized normal; we mentioned the normal mixture model in the RiskMetrics section.4 Hull and White suggest ways of estimating Value at Risk when variables are not normally distributed; they allow users to specify any probability distribution for variables but require that transformations of the distribution4 Duffie, D.
and J.
Pan, 1997, An Overview of Value at Risk, Working Paper, Stanford University.
The authors provide a comprehensive examination of different distributions and the parameters that have to be estimated for each one.

 still fall a multivariate normal distribution.5 These and other papers like it develop interesting variations but have to overcome two practical problems.
Estimating inputs for non-normal models can be very difficult to do, especially when working with historical data, and the probabilities of losses and Value at Risk are simplest to compute with the normal distribution and get progressively more difficult with asymmetric and fat-tailed distributions.

 Second, other research has been directed at bettering the estimation techniques to yield more reliable variance and covariance values to use in the VaR calculations.
Some suggest refinements on sampling methods and data innovations that allow for better estimates of variances and covariances looking forward.
Others posit that statistical innovations can yield better estimates from existing data.
For instance, conventional estimates of VaR are based upon the assumption that the standard deviation in returns does not change over time (homoskedasticity), Engle argues that we get much better estimates by using models that explicitly allow the standard deviation to change of time (heteroskedasticity).6 In fact, he suggests two variants – Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity (ARCH) and Generalized Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity (GARCH) – that provide better forecasts of variance and, by extension, better measures of Value at Risk.7

 One final critique that can be leveled against the variance-covariance estimate of VaR is that it is designed for portfolios where there is a linear relationship between risk and portfolio positions.
Consequently, it can break down when the portfolio includes options, since the payoffs on an option are not linear.
In an attempt to deal with options and other non-linear instruments in portfolios, researchers have developed Quadratic Value at Risk measures.8 These quadratic measures, sometimes categorized as delta-gamma models (to

 5 Hull, J.
and A.
White, 1998, Value at Risk when daily changes are not normally distributed, Journal of Derivatives, v5, 9-19.
6 Engle, R., 2001, Garch 101: The Use of ARCH and GARCH models in Applied Econometrics, Journal of Economic Perspectives, v15, 157-168.
7 He uses the example of a $1,000,0000 portfolio composed of 50% NASDAQ stocks, 30% Dow Jones stocks and 20% long bonds, with statistics computed from March 23, 1990 to March 23, 2000.
Using the conventional measure of daily standard deviation of 0.83% computed over a 10-year period, he estimates the value at risk in a day to be $22,477.
Using an ARCH model, the forecast standard deviation is 1.46%, leading to VaR of $33,977.
Allowing for the fat tails in the distribution increases the VaR to $39,996.
8 Britten-Jones, M.
and Schaefer, S.M., 1999, Non-linear value-at-risk, European Finance Review, v2, 161-

 contrast with the more conventional linear models which are called delta-normal), allow researchers to estimate the Value at Risk for complicated portfolios that include options and option-like securities such as convertible bonds.
The cost, though, is that the mathematics associated with deriving the VaR becomes much complicated and that some of the intuition will be lost along the way.

 Historical simulations represent the simplest way of estimating the Value at Risk for many portfolios.
In this approach, the VaR for a portfolio is estimated by creating a hypothetical time series of returns on that portfolio, obtained by running the portfolio through actual historical data and computing the changes that would have occurred in each period.General Approach

 To run a historical simulation, we begin with time series data on each market risk factor, just as we would for the variance-covariance approach.
However, we do not use the data to estimate variances and covariances looking forward, since the changes in the portfolio over time yield all the information you need to compute the Value at Risk.Cabedo and Moya provide a simple example of the application of historical simulation to measure the Value at Risk in oil prices.9 Using historical data from 1992 to 1998, they obtained the daily prices in Brent Crude Oil and graphed out the prices in Figure 7.2:187; Rouvinez, C.
, 1997, Going Greek with VAR, Risk, v10, 57-65.
2 p p 1 6 1 - 1 8 79 J.D.
Cabedo and I.
Moya, 2003, Estimating oil price Value at Risk using the historical simulation approach, Energy Economics, v25, 239-253.

 The implicit assumptions of the historical simulation approach are visible in this simple example.
The first is that the approach is agnostic when it comes to distributional assumptions, and the VaR is determined by the actual price movements.
In other words, there are no underlying assumptions of normality driving the conclusion.
The second is that each day in the time series carries an equal weight when it comes to measuring the VaR, a potential problem if there is a trend in the variability – lower in the earlier periods and higher in the later periods, for instance.
The third is that the approach is based on the assumption of history repeating itself, with the period used providing a full and complete snapshot of the risks that the oil market is exposed to in other periods.10 By separating the price changes into positive and negative changes, they allow for asymmetry in the return process where large negative changes are more common than large positive changes, or vice verse.AssessmentWhile historical simulations are popular and relatively easy to run, they do come with baggage.
In particular, the underlying assumptions of the model generate give rise to its weaknesses.

 The trade off that we mentioned earlier is therefore at the heart of the historic simulation debate.
The approach saves us the trouble and related problems of having to make specific assumptions about distributions of returns but it implicitly assumes that the distribution of past returns is a good and complete representation of expected futurereturns.
In a market where risks are volatile and structural shifts occur at regular intervals, this assumption is difficult to sustain.As with the other approaches to computing VaR, there have been modifications suggested to the approach, largely directed at taking into account some of the criticisms mentioned in the last section.

 a.
Weighting the recent past more: A reasonable argument can be made that returns in the recent past are better predictors of the immediate future than are returns from the distant past.
Boudoukh, Richardson and Whitelaw present a variant on historical simulations, where recent data is weighted more, using a decay factor as their time weighting mechanism.11 In simple terms, each return, rather than being weighted equally, is assigned a probability weight based on its recency.
In other words, if the decay factor is .90, the most recent observation has the probability weight p, the observation prior to it will be weighted 0.9p, the one before that is weighted 0.81p and so on.
In fact, the conventional historical simulation approach is a special case of this approach, where the decay factor is set to 1.
Boudoukh et al.
illustrate the use of this technique by computing the VaR for a stock portfolio, using 250 days of returns, immediately before and after the market crash on October 19, 1987.12 With historical simulation, the Value at Risk for this portfolio is for all practical purposes unchanged the day after the crash because it weights each day (including October 19) equally.
With decay factors, the Value at Risk very quickly adjusts to reflect the size of the crash.13

 11 Boudoukh, J., M.
Richardson and R.
Whitelaw, 1998.
"The Best of Both Worlds," Risk, v11, 64-67.
12 The Dow dropped 508 points on October 19, 1987, approximately 22%.
13 With a decay factor of 0.99, the most recent day will be weighted about 1% (instead of 1/250).
With a decay factor of 0.97, the most recent day will be weighted about 3%.autoregressive moving average (ARMA) model to the oil price data from 1992 to 1998 and use this model to forecast returns with a 99% confidence interval for the holdout period of 1999.
The actual oil price returns in 1999 fall within the predicted bounds 98.8% of the time, in contrast to the 97.7% of the time that they do with the unadjusted historical simulation.
One big reason for the improvement is that the measured VaR is much more sensitive to changes in the variance of oil prices with time series models, than with the historical simulation, as can be seen in figure 7.3:Figure 7.3: Value at Risk Estimates (99%) from Time Series Models

 3.
Volatility Updating: Hull and White suggest a different way of updating historical data for shifts in volatility.
For assets where the recent volatility is higher than historical volatility, they recommend that the historical data be adjusted to reflect the change.
Assume, for illustrative purposes, that the updated standard deviation in prices is 0.8% and that it was only 0.6% when estimated with data from 20 days ago.
Rather than use the price change from 20 days ago, they recommend scaling that number to reflect the change in volatility; a 1% return on that day would be converted into a 1.33% return( ).
Their approach requires day-specific estimates of variance that change over the historical time period, which they obtain by using GARCH models.14

 Note that all of these variations are designed to capture shifts that have occurred in the recent past but are underweighted by the conventional approach.
None of them are designed to bring in the risks that are out of the sampled historical period (but are still relevant risks) or to capture structural shifts in the market and the economy.
In a paper comparing the different historical simulation approaches, Pritsker notes the limitations of the variants.15In the last chapter, we examined the use of Monte Carlo simulations as a risk assessment tool.
These simulations also happen to be useful in assessing Value at Risk, with the focus on the probabilities of losses exceeding a specified value rather than on the entire distribution.General Description

 The first two steps in a Monte Carlo simulation mirror the first two steps in the Variance-covariance method where we identify the markets risks that affect the asset or assets in a portfolio and convert individual assets into positions in standardized instruments.
It is in the third step that the differences emerge.
Rather than compute the variances and covariances across the market risk factors, we take the simulation route, where we specify probability distributions for each of the market risk factors and specify how these market risk factors move together.
Thus, in the example of the six-month Dollar/Euro forward contract that we used earlier, the probability distributions for the 6- month zero coupon $ bond, the 6-month zero coupon euro bond and the dollar/euro spot rate will have to be specified, as will the correlation across these instruments.While the estimation of parameters is easier if you assume normal distributions for all variables, the power of Monte Carlo simulations comes from the freedom you have14 Hull, J.
and A.
White, 1998, Incorporating Volatility Updating into the Historical Simulation Method for Value at Risk, Journal of Risk, v1, 5-19.
15 Pritsker, M., 2001, The Hidden Dangers of Historical Simulation, Working paper, SSRN.to pick alternate distributions for the variables.
In addition, you can bring in subjective judgments to modify these distributions.

 Once the distributions are specified, the simulation process starts.
In each run, the market risk variables take on different outcomes and the value of the portfolio reflects the outcomes.
After a repeated series of runs, numbering usually in the thousands, you will have a distribution of portfolio values that can be used to assess Value at Risk.
For instance, assume that you run a series of 10,000 simulations and derive corresponding values for the portfolio.
These values can be ranked from highest to lowest, and the 95% percentile Value at Risk will correspond to the 500th lowest value and the 99th percentile to the 100th lowest value.

 Much of what was said about the strengths and weaknesses of the simulation approach in the last chapter apply to its use in computing Value at Risk.
Quickly reviewing the criticism, a simulation is only as good as the probability distribution for the inputs that are fed into it.
While Monte Carlo simulations are often touted as more sophisticated than historical simulations, many users directly draw on historical data to make their distributional assumptions.

 In addition, as the number of market risk factors increases and their co- movements become more complex, Monte Carlo simulations become more difficult to run for two reasons.
First, you now have to estimate the probability distributions for hundreds of market risk variables rather than just the handful that we talked about in the context of analyzing a single project or asset.
Second, the number of simulations that you need to run to obtain reasonable estimate of Value at Risk will have to increase substantially (to the tens of thousands from the thousands).

 The strengths of Monte Carlo simulations can be seen when compared to the other two approaches for computing Value at Risk.
Unlike the variance-covariance approach, we do not have to make unrealistic assumptions about normality in returns.
In contrast to the historical simulation approach, we begin with historical data but are free to bring in both subjective judgments and other information to improve forecasted probabilitydistributions.
Finally, Monte Carlo simulations can be used to assess the Value at Risk for any type of portfolio and are flexible enough to cover options and option-like securities.

 As with the other approaches, the modifications to the Monte Carlo simulation are directed at its biggest weakness, which is its computational bulk.
To provide a simple illustration, a yield curve model with 15 key rates and four possible values for each will require 1,073,741,824 simulations (415) to be complete.
The modified versions narrow the focus, using different techniques, and reduce the required number of simulations.simulation results.1716 Frye, J., 1997, “Principals of Risk: Finding Value-at-Risk Through Factor-Based Interest RateScenarios.” NationsBanc-CRT.
17 Jamshidian, Farshid and Yu Zhu, 1997, “Scenario Simulation: Theory and Methodology.” Finance and Stochastics, v1, 43-67.
In principal component analysis, you look for common factors affecting returns in historical data.the sampling process in Monte Carlo simulations and report a substantial savings in time and resources, without any appreciable loss of precision.18The trade off in each of these modifications is simple.
You give some of the power and precision of the Monte Carlo approach but gain in terms of estimation requirements and computational time.

 Each of the three approaches to estimating Value at Risk has advantages and comes with baggage.
The variance-covariance approach, with its delta normal and delta gamma variations, requires us to make strong assumptions about the return distributions of standardized assets, but is simple to compute, once those assumptions have been made.
The historical simulation approach requires no assumptions about the nature of return distributions but implicitly assumes that the data used in the simulation is a representative sample of the risks looking forward.
The Monte Carlo simulation approach allows for the most flexibility in terms of choosing distributions for returns and bringing in subjective judgments and external data, but is the most demanding from a computational standpoint.Since the end product of all three approaches is the Value at Risk, it is worth asking two questions.

 To answer the first question, we have to recognize that the answers we obtain with all three approaches are a function of the inputs.
For instance, the historical simulation and variance-covariance methods will yield the same Value at Risk if the historical returns data is normally distributed and is used to estimate the variance-covariance matrix.
Similarly, the variance-covariance approach and Monte Carlo simulations will yield roughly the same values if all of the inputs in the latter are assumed to be normally distributed with consistent means and variances.
As the assumptions diverge, so will the18 Glasserman, P., P.
Heidelberger and P.
Shahabuddin, 2000, Efficient Monte Carlo Methods for Value at Risk, Working Paper, Columbia University.answers.
Finally, the historical and Monte Carlo simulation approaches will converge if the distributions we use in the latter are entirely based upon historical data.As for the second, the answer seems to depend both upon what risks are being

 assessed and how the competing approaches are used.
As we noted at the end of each approach, there are variants that have developed within each approach, aimed at improving performance.
Many of the comparisons across approaches are skewed by the fact that the researchers doing the comparison are testing variants of an approach that they have developed against alternatives.
Not surprisingly, they find that their approaches work better than the alternatives.
Looking at the unbiased (relatively) studies of the alternative approaches, the evidence is mixed.
Hendricks compared the VaR estimates obtained using the variance-covariance and historical simulation approaches on 1000 randomly selected foreign exchange portfolios.19 He used nine measurement criteria, including the mean squared error (of the actual loss against the forecasted loss) and the percentage of the outcomes covered and concluded that the different approaches yield risk measures that are roughly comparable and that they all cover the risk that they are intended to cover, at least up to the 95 percent confidence interval.
He did conclude that all of the measures have trouble capturing extreme outcomes and shifts in underlying risk.
Lambadrais, Papadopoulou, Skiadopoulus and Zoulis computed the Value at Risk in the Greek stock and bond market with historical with Monte Carlo simulations, and found that while historical simulation overstated the VaR for linear stock portfolios, theresults were less clear cut with non-linear bond portfolios.20

 In short, the question of which VaR approach is best is best answered by looking at the task at hand? If you are assessing the Value at Risk for portfolios, that do not include options, over very short time periods (a day or a week), the variance-covariance approach does a reasonably good job, notwithstanding its heroic assumptions of normality.
If the Value at Risk is being computed for a risk source that is stable and where there is substantial historical data (commodity prices, for instance), historical19 Hendricks, D., 1996, Evaluation of value-at-risk models using historical data, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Economic Policy Review, v2,, 39–70.
20Lambadiaris, G.
, L.
Papadopoulou, G.
Skiadopoulos and Y.
Zoulis, 2000, VAR: Hisory or Simulation?, www.risk.net.simulations provide good estimates.
In the most general case of computing VaR for non- linear portfolios (which include options) over longer time periods, where the historical data is volatile and non-stationary and the normality assumption is questionable, Monte Carlo simulations do best.

 While Value at Risk has acquired a strong following in the risk management community, there is reason to be skeptical of both its accuracy as a risk management tool and its use in decision making.
There are many dimensions on which researcher have taken issue with VaR and we will categorize the criticism into those dimensions.

 There is no precise measure of Value at Risk, and each measure comes with its own limitations.
The end-result is that the Value at Risk that we compute for an asset, portfolio or a firm can be wrong, and sometimes, the errors can be large enough to make VaR a misleading measure of risk exposure.
The reasons for the errors can vary across firms and for different measures and include the following.

 a.
Return distributions: Every VaR measure makes assumptions about return distributions, which, if violated, result in incorrect estimates of the Value at Risk.
With delta-normal estimates of VaR, we are assuming that the multivariate return distribution is the normal distribution, since the Value at Risk is based entirely on the standard deviation in returns.
With Monte Carlo simulations, we get more freedom to specify different types of return distributions, but we can still be wrong when we make those judgments.
Finally, with historical simulations, we are assuming that the historical return distribution (based upon past data) is representative of the distribution of returns looking forward.

 There is substantial evidence that returns are not normally distributed and that not only are outliers more common in reality but that they are much larger than expected, given the normal distribution.
In chapter 4, we noted Mandelbrot’s critique of the mean- variance framework and his argument that returns followed power law distributions.
His critique extended to the use of Value at Risk as the risk measure of choice at financialservice firms.
Firms that use VaR to measure their risk exposure, he argued, would be under prepared for large and potentially catastrophic events that are extremely unlikely in a normal distribution but seem to occur at regular intervals in the real world.

 b.
History may not a good predictor: All measures of Value at Risk use historical data to some degree or the other.
In the variance-covariance method, historical data is used to compute the variance-covariance matrix that is the basis for the computation of VaR.
In historical simulations, the VaR is entirely based upon the historical data with the likelihood of value losses computed from the time series of returns.
In Monte Carlo simulations, the distributions don’t have to be based upon historical data but it is difficult to see how else they can be derived.
In short, any Value at Risk measure will be a function of the time period over which the historical data is collected.
If that time period was a relatively stable one, the computed Value at Risk will be a low number and will understate the risk looking forward.
Conversely, if the time period examined was volatile, the Value at Risk will be set too high.
Earlier in this chapter, we provided the example of VaR for oil price movements and concluded that VaR measures based upon the 1992-98 period, where oil prices were stable, would have been too low for the 1999-2004 period,when volatility returned to the market.

 c.
Non-stationary Correlations: Measures of Value at Risk are conditioned on explicit estimates of correlation across risk sources (in the variance-covariance and Monte Carlo simulations) or implicit assumptions about correlation (in historical simulations).
These correlation estimates are usually based upon historical data and are extremely volatile.
One measure of how much they move can be obtained by tracking the correlations between widely following asset classes over time.
Figure 7.4 graphs the correlation between the S&P 500 and the ten-year treasury bond returns, using daily returns for a year, every year from 1990 to 2005:Figure 7.4: Time Series of Correlation between Stock and Bond ReturnsSkintzi, Skiadoupoulous and Refenes show that the error in Var increases as the correlation error increases and that the effect is magnified in Monte Carlo simulations.2121 Skintzi, V.D., G.
Skiadoubpoulous and A.P.N.
Refenes, 2005, The Effect of Misestimating Correlation on Value at Risk, Journal of Alternative Investments, Spring 2005.

 One indicator that Value at Risk is subject to judgment comes from the range of values that analysts often assign to the measure, when looking at the same risk for the same entity.
Different assumptions about return distributions and different historical time periods can yield very different values for VaR.22 In fact, different measures of Value at Risk can be derived for a portfolio even when we start with the same underlying data and methodology.23 A study of Value at Risk measures used at large bank holding companies to measure risk in their trading portfolios concluded that they were much too conservatively set and were slow to react to changing circumstances; in fact, simple time series models outperformed sophisticated VaR models in predictions.
In fact, the study concluded that the computed Value at Risk was more a precautionary number for capital at risk than a measure of portfolio risk.
24 In defense of Value at Risk, it should be pointed out that there the reported Values at Risk at banks are correlated with the volatility in trading revenues at these banks and can be used as a proxy for risk (at leastfrom the trading component).25

 While many analysts like Value at Risk because of its simplicity and intuitive appeal, relative to other risk measures, its simplicity emanates from its narrow definition of risk.
Firms that depend upon VaR as the only measure of risk can not only be lulled into a false sense of complacency about the risks they face but also make decisions that are not in their best interests.

 22 Beder, T.S., 1995, VAR: Seductive but Dangerous, Financial Analysts Journal, September-October 1995.
23 Marshall, Chris, and Michael Siegel, “Value at Risk: Implementing a Risk Measurement Standard.” Journal of Derivatives 4, No.
3 (1997), pp.
91-111.
Different measures of Value at Risk are estimated using different software packages on the J.P.
Morgan RiskMetrics data and methodology.
24 Berkowitz, J.
and J.
O’Brien, 2002, How accurate are Value at Risk Models at Commercial Banks, Journal of Finance, v57, 1093-1111.that one can earn with 99% probability, VaR is measured in terms of potential losses and not gains.
Second, most VaR measures are built around market risk effects.
Again, while there is no reason why we cannot look at the Value at Risk, relative to all risks, practicality forces up to focus on just market risks and their effects on value.
In other words, the true Value at Risk can be much greater than the computed Value at Risk if one considers political risk, liquidity risk and regulatory risks that are not built into the VaR.b.
Short term: Value at Risk can be computed over a quarter or a year, but it is usuallyrisk distribution will work better.25 Jorion, P., 2002, How informative are Value-at-Risk Disclosures?, The Accounting Review, v77, 911- 932.

 In short, Value at Risk measures look at only a small slice of the risk that an asset is exposed to and a great deal of valuable information in the distribution is ignored.
Even if the VaR assessment that the probability of losing more than $ 100 million is less than 5% is correct, would it not make sense to know what the most you can lose in that catastrophic range (with less than 5% probability) would be? It should, after all, make a difference whether your worst possible loss was $ 1 billion or $ 150 million.
Looking back at chapter 6 on probabilistic risk assessment approaches, Value at Risk is closer to the worst case assessment in scenario analysis than it is to the fuller risk assessment approaches.

 Even if Value at Risk is correctly measured, it is not clear that using it as the measure of risk leads to more reasoned and sensible decisions on the part of managers and investors.
In fact, there are two strands of criticism against the use of Value at Risk in decision making.
The first is that making investment decisions based upon Value at Risk can lead to over exposure to risk, even when the decision makers are rational and Value at Risk is estimated precisely.
The other is that managers who understand how VaR is computed, can game the measure to report superior performance, while exposing the firm to substantial risks.you exceed the VaR cutoff probability (90% or 95%), you are opening ourselves to the possibility of very large losses in the worse case scenarios.26VaR is more open to this game playing than other measures.The popularity of Value at Risk has given rise to numerous variants of it, some designed to mitigate problems associated with the original measure and some directed towards extending the use of the measure from financial service firms to the rest of the market.

 There are modifications of VaR that adapt the original measure to new uses but remain true to its focus on overall value.
Hallerback and Menkveld modify the conventional VaR measure to accommodate multiple market factors and computed what they call a Component Value at Risk, breaking down a firm’s risk exposure to different market risks.
They argue that managers at multinational firms can use this risk measure to not only determine where their risk is coming from but to manage it better in the interests of maximizing shareholder wealth.28 In an attempt to bring in the possible losses in the

 26 Basak, S.
and A.
Shapiro, 2001, Value-at-Risk Based Management: Optimal Policies and Asset Prices, Review of Financial Studies, v14 , 371-405.
27 Ju, X.
and N.D.
Pearson, 1998, Using Value-at-Risk to Control Risk Taking: How wrong can you be?, Working Paper, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
28 Hallerback, W.G.
and A.J.
Menkveld, 2002, Analyzing Perceived Downside Risk: the Component

 tail of the distribution (beyond the VaR probability), Larsen, Mausser and Uryasev estimate what they call a Conditional Value at Risk, which they define as a weighted average of the VaR and losses exceeding the VaR.29 This conditional measure can be considered an upper bound on the Value at Risk and may reduce the problems associated with excessive risk taking by managers.
Finally, there are some who note that Value at Risk is just one aspect of an area of mathematics called Extreme Value Theory, and that there may be better and more comprehensive ways of measuring exposure to catastrophicrisks.30

 The other direction that researchers have taken is to extend the measure to cover metrics other than value.
The most widely used of these is Cashflow at Risk (CFaR).
While Value at Risk focuses on changes in the overall value of an asset or portfolio as market risks vary, Cash Flow at Risk is more focused on the operating cash flow during a period and market induced variations in it.
Consequently, with Cash flow at Risk, we assess the likelihood that operating cash flows will drop below a pre-specified level; an annual CFaR of $ 100 million with 90% confidence can be read to mean that there is only a 10% probability that cash flows will drop by more than $ 100 million, during the next year.
Herein lies the second practical difference between Value at Risk and Cashflow at Risk.
While Value at Risk is usually computed for very short time intervals – days or weeks – Cashflow at Risk is computed over much longer periods – quarters or years.

 Why focus on cash flows rather than value? First, for a firm that has to make contractual payments (interest payments, debt repayments and lease expenses) during a particular period, it is cash flow that matters; after all, the value can remain relatively stable while cash flows plummet, putting the firm at risk of default.
Second, unlike financial service firms where the value measured is the value of marketable securities which can be converted into cash at short notice, value at a non-financial service firm takes the form of real investments in plant, equipment and other fixed assets which are far more difficult to monetize.
Finally, assessing the market risks embedded in value, whileValue-at-Risk Framework, Working Paper.
29 Larsen, N., H.
Mausser and S.
Ursyasev, 2001, Algorithms for Optimization of Value-at-Risk, Research Report, University of Florida.
30 Embrechts, P., 2001, Extreme Value Theory: Potential and Limitations as an Integrated Risk Management Tool, Working Paper (listed on GloriaMundi.org).relatively straight forward for a portfolio of financial assets, can be much more difficult to do for a manufacturing or technology firm.How do we measure CFaR? While we can use any of the three approaches

 described for measuring VaR – variance-covariance matrices, historical simulations and Monte Carlo simulations – the process becomes more complicated if we consider all risks and not just market risks.
Stein, Usher, LaGattuta and Youngen develop a template for estimating Cash Flow at Risk, using data on comparable firms, where comparable is defined in terms of market capitalization, riskiness, profitability and stock-price performance, and use it to measure the risk embedded in the earnings before interest, taxes and depreciation (EBITDA) at Coca Cola, Dell and Cignus (a small pharmaceutical firm).31 Using regressions of EBITDA as a percent of assets across the comparable firms over time, for a five-percent worst case, they estimate that EBITDA would drop by $5.23 per $ 100 of assets at Coca Cola, $28.50 for Dell and $47.31 for Cygnus.
They concede that while the results look reasonable, the approach is sensitive to both the definition of comparable firms and is likely to yield estimates with error.

 There are less common adaptations that extend the measure to cover earnings (Earnings at Risk) and to stock prices (SPaR).
These variations are designed by what the researchers view as the constraining variable in decision making.
For firms that are focused on earnings per share and ensuring that it does not drop below some pre- specified floor, it makes sense to focus on Earnings at Risk.
For other firms, where a drop in the stock price below a given level will give risk to constraints or delisting, it is SPaR that is the relevant risk control measure.

 In the last three chapters, we have considered a range of risk assessment tools.
In chapter 5, we introduced risk and return models that attempted to either increase the discount rate or reduce the cash flows (certainty equivalents) used to value risky assets, leading to risk adjusted values.
In chapter 6, we considered probabilistic approaches to risk assessment including scenario analysis, simulations and decision trees, where weconsidered most or all possible outcomes from a risky investment and used that information in valuation and investment decisions.
In this chapter, we introduced Value at Risk, touted by its adherents as a more intuitive, if not better, way of assessing risk.

 From our perspective, and it may very well be biased, Value at Risk seems to be a throwback and not an advance in thinking about risk.
Of all the risk assessment tools that we have examined so far, it is the most focused on downside risk, and even within that downside risk, at a very small slice of it.
It seems foolhardy to believe that optimal investment decisions can flow out of such a cramped view of risk.
Value at Risk seems to take a subset of the information that comes out of scenario analysis (the close to worst case scenario) or simulations (the fifth percentile or tenth percentile of the distribution) and throw the rest of it out.
There are some who would argue that presenting decision makers with an entire probability distribution rather than just the loss that they will make with 5% probability will lead to confusion, but if that is the case, there is little hope that such individuals can be trusted to make good decisions in the first place with any risk assessment measure.How then can we account for the popularity of Value at Risk? A cynic would

 attribute it to an accident of history where a variance-covariance matrix, with a dubious history of forecasting accuracy, was made available to panicked bankers, reeling from a series of financial disasters wrought by rogue traders.
Consultants and software firms then filled in the gaps and sold the measure as the magic bullet to stop runaway risk taking.
The usage of Value at Risk has also been fed into by three factors specific to financial service firms.
The first is that these firms have limited capital, relative to the huge nominal values of the leveraged portfolios that they hold; small changes in the latter can put the firm at risk.
The second is that the assets held by financial service firms are primarily marketable securities, making it easier to break risks down into market risks and compute Value at Risk.
Finally, the regulatory authorities have augmented the use of the measure by demanding regular reports on Value at Risk exposure.
Thus, while Value at Risk may be a flawed and narrow measure of risk, it is a natural measure of short term risk for financial service firms and there is evidence that it does its job adequately.31 Stein, J.C., S.E.
Usher, D.
LaGattuta and J.
Youngen, 2000, A Comparables Approach to Measuring Cashflow-at-Risk for Non-Financial Firms, Working Paper, National Economic Research Associates.

 For non-financial service firms, there is a place for Value at Risk and its variants in the risk toolbox, but more as a secondary measure of risk rather than a primary measure.
Consider how payback (the number of years that it takes to make your money back in an investment) has been used in conventional capital budgeting.
When picking between two projects with roughly equivalent net present value (or risk adjusted value), a cash strapped firm will pick the project with the speedier payback.
By the same token, when picking between two investments that look equivalent on a risk adjusted basis, a firm should pick the investment with less Cashflow or Value at Risk.
This is especially true if the firm has large amounts of debt outstanding and a drop in the cash flows or value may put the firm at risk of default.

 Value at Risk has developed as a risk assessment tool at banks and other financial service firms in the last decade.
Its usage in these firms has been driven by the failure of the risk tracking systems used until the early 1990s to detect dangerous risk taking on the part of traders and it offered a key benefit: a measure of capital at risk under extreme conditions in trading portfolios that could be updated on a regular basis.While the notion of Value at Risk is simple- the maximum amount that you can

 lose on an investment over a particular period with a specified probability – there are three ways in which Value at Risk can be measured.
In the first, we assume that the returns generated by exposure to multiple market risks are normally distributed.
We use a variance-covariance matrix of all standardized instruments representing various market risks to estimate the standard deviation in portfolio returns and compute the Value at Risk from this standard deviation.
In the second approach, we run a portfolio through historical data – a historical simulation – and estimate the probability that the losses exceed specified values.
In the third approach, we assume return distributions for each of the individual market risks and run Monte Carlo simulations to arrive at the Value at Risk.
Each measure comes with its own pluses and minuses: the Variance-covariance approach is simple to implement but the normality assumption can be tough to sustain, historical simulations assume that the past time periods used are representative of thefuture and Monte Carlo simulations are time and computation intensive.
All three yield Value at Risk measures that are estimates and subject to judgment.

 We understand why Value at Risk is a popular risk assessment tool in financial service firms, where assets are primarily marketable securities, there is limited capital at play and a regulatory overlay that emphasizes short term exposure to extreme risks.
We are hard pressed to see why Value at Risk is of particular use to non-financial service firms, unless they are highly levered and risk default if cash flows or value fall below a pre-specified level.
Even in those cases, it would seem to us to be more prudent to use all of the information in the probability distribution rather than a small slice of it.

 In this appendix, we will compute the VaR of a six-month forward contract, going through four steps – the mapping of the standardized market risks and instruments underlying this security, a determination of the positions that you would need to take in the standardized instruments, the estimation of the variances and covariances of these instruments and the computation of the VaR in the forward contract.

 Step 1: The first step requires us to take each of the assets in a portfolio and map that asset on to simpler, standardized instruments.
Consider the example of a six-month dollar/euro forward contract.
The market factors affecting this instrument are the six- month riskfree rates in each currency and the spot exchange rate; the financial instruments that proxy for these risk factors are the six-month zero coupon dollar bond, the six-month zero coupon Euro bond and the spot $/Euro.

 Step 2: Each financial asset is stated as a set of positions in the standardized instruments.
To make the computation for the forward contract, assume that the forward contract requires you to deliver $12.7 million dollars in 180 days and receive 10 million euros in exchange.
Assume, in addition, that the current spot rate is $1.26/Euro and that the annualized interest rates are 4% on a six-month zero coupon dollar bond and 3% on a six- month zero coupon euro bond.
The positions in the three standardized instruments can becomputed as follows:Value of short position in zero-coupon dollar bondValue of long position in zero-coupon euro bond (in dollar terms) holding spot rate fixedValue of spot euro position (in dollar terms) holding euro rate fixedNote that the last two positions are equal because the forward asset exposes you to risk in the euro in two places – both the riskless euro rate and the spot exchange rate can changeover time.

 Step 3: Once the standardized instruments that affect the asset or assets in a portfolio been identified, we have to estimate the variances in each of these instruments and the covariances across the instruments.
Considering again the six-month $/Euro forward contract and the three standardized instruments we mapped that investment onto, assume that the variance/covariance matrix (in daily returns) across those instruments is as follows:32data.

 Step 4: The Value at Risk for the portfolio can now be computed using the weights on the standardized instruments computed in step 2 and the variances and covariances in these instruments computed in step 3.
For instance, the daily variance of the 6-month $/Euro forward contract can be computed as follows: (Xj is the position in standardized asset j and σij is the covariance between assets i and j)Variance of forward contract== $ 0.0111021 millionDaily Standard deviation of forward contract = 0.01110211/2 = $105,367If we assume a normal distribution, we can now specify the potential value at risk at a 90% confidence interval on this forward contract to be $ 173,855 for a day.VaR = $105,367* 1.65 = $173,855

 32 The covariance of an asset with itself is the variance.
Thus, the values on the diagonal represent the variances of these assets; the daily return variance in the six-month $ bond is 0.0000314.
The off-diagonal values are the covariances; the covariance between the spot $/Euro rate and the six-month $ bond is 0.0000012.

 The approaches that we have described in the last three chapters for assessing the effects of risk, for the most part, are focused on the negative effects of risk.
Put another way, they are all focused on the downside of risk and they miss the opportunity component that provides the upside.
The real options approach is the only one that gives prominence to the upside potential for risk, based on the argument that uncertainty can sometimes be a source of additional value, especially to those who are poised to take advantage of it.

 We begin this chapter by describing in very general terms the argument behind the real options approach, noting its foundations in two elements – the capacity of individuals or entities to learn from what is happening around them and their willingness and the ability to modify behavior based upon that learning.
We then describe the various forms that real options can take in practice and how they can affect the way we assess the value of investments and our behavior.
In the last section, we consider some of the potential pitfalls in using the real options argument and how it can be best incorporated into a portfolio of risk assessment tools.To understand the basis of the real options argument and the reasons for its allure, it is easiest to go back to risk assessment tool that we unveiled in chapter 6 – decision trees.
Consider a very simple example of a decision tree in figure 8.1:Figure 8.1: Simple Decision TreeExpected Value = 0.50 (100) + 0.5 (-120) = -$10Now contrast this will the slightly more complicated two-phase decision tree in figureExpected Value = (2/3) (-10) + 1/3 [10+(2/3)(90) + (1/3)(-110)] = $4.44

 What is it about the second decision tree that makes a potentially bad investment (in the first tree) into a good investment (in the second)? We would attribute the change to two factors.
First, by allowing for an initial phase where you get to observe the cashflows on a first and relatively small try at the investment, we allow for learning.
Thus, getting a bad outcome in the first phase (-10 instead of +10) is an indicator that the overall investment is more likely to be money losing than money making.
Second, you act on the learning by abandoning the investment, if the outcome from the first phase is negative; we will call this adaptive behavior.

 In essence, the value of real options stems from the fact that when investing in risky assets, we can learn from observing what happens in the real world and adapting our behavior to increase our potential upside from the investment and to decrease the possible downside.
Consider again the Chinese symbol for risk, as a combination of danger and opportunity that we used in chapter 1.
In the real options framework, we use updated knowledge or information to expand opportunities while reducing danger.
In the context of a risky investment, there are three potential actions that can be taken based

 upon this updated knowledge.
The first is that you build on good fortune to increase your possible profits; this is the option to expand.
For instance, a market test that suggests that consumers are far more receptive to a new product than you expected them to be could be used as a basis for expanding the scale of the project and speeding its delivery to the market.
The second is to scale down or even abandon an investment when the information you receive contains bad news; this is the option to abandon and can allow you to cut your losses.
The third is to hold off on making further investments, if the information you receive suggests ambivalence about future prospects; this is the option to delay or wait.
You are, in a sense, buying time for the investment, hoping that product and market developments will make it attractive in the future.

 We would add one final piece to the mix that is often forgotten but is just as important as the learning and adaptive behavior components in terms of contributing to the real options arguments.
The value of learning is greatest, when you and only you have access to that learning and can act on it.
After all, the expected value of knowledge that is public, where anyone can act on that knowledge, will be close to zero.
We will term this third condition “exclusivity” and use it to scrutinize when real options have the mostvalue.

 Before we embark on a discussion of the options to delay, expand and abandon, it is important that we consider how the real options view of risk differs from how the approaches laid out in the last three chapters look at risk, and the implications for the valuation of risky assets.

 When computing the risk-adjusted value for risky assets, we generally discount back the expected cash flows using a discount rate adjusted to reflect risk.
We use higher discount rates for riskier assets and thus assign a lower value for any given set of cash flows.
In the process, we are faced with the task of converting all possible outcomes in the future into one expected number.
The real options critique of discounted cash flow valuation can be boiled down simply.
The expected cash flows for a risky asset, where the holder of the asset can learn from observing what happens in early periods and adapting behavior, will be understated because it will not capture the diminution of the

 downside risk from the option to abandon and the expansion of upside potential from the options to expand and delay.
To provide a concrete example, assume that you are valuing an oil company and that you estimate the cash flows by multiplying the number of barrels of oil that you expect the company to produce each year by the expected oil price per barrel.
While you may have reasonable and unbiased estimates of both these numbers (the expected number of barrels produced and the expected oil price), what you are missing in your expected cash flows is the interplay between these numbers.
Oil companies can observe the price of oil and adjust production accordingly; they produce more oil when oil prices are high and less when oil prices are low.
In addition, their exploration activity will ebb and flow as the oil price moves.
As a consequence, their cash flows computed across all oil price scenarios will be greater than the expected cash flows used in the risk adjusted value calculation, and the difference will widen as the uncertainty about oil prices increases.
So, what would real options proponents suggest? They would argue that the risk adjusted value, obtained from conventional valuation approaches, is too low and that a premium should be added to it to reflect the option toadjust production inherent in these firms.The approach that is closest to real options in terms of incorporating adaptive

 behavior is the decision tree approach, where the optimal decisions at each stage are conditioned on outcomes at prior stages.
The two approaches, though, will usually yield different values for the same risky asset for two reasons.
The first is that the decision tree approach is built on probabilities and allows for multiple outcomes at each branch, whereas the real option approach is more constrained in its treatment of uncertainty.
In its binomial version, there can be only two outcomes at each stage and the probabilities are not specified.
The second is that the discount rates used to estimate present values in decision trees, at least in conventional usage, tend to be risk adjusted and not conditioned on which branch of the decision tree you are looking at.
When computing the value of a diabetes drug in a decision tree, in chapter 6, we used a 10% cost of capital as the discount rate for all cash flows from the drug in both good and bad outcomes.
In the real options approach, the discount rate will vary depending upon the branch of the tree being analyzed.
In other words, the cost of capital for an oil companies if oil prices increase may very well be different from the cost of capital when oil prices decrease.
Copelandand Antikarov provide a persuasive proof that the value of a risky asset will be the same under real options and decision trees, if we allow for path-dependent discount rates.1

 Simulations and real options are not so much competing approaches for risk assessment, as they are complementary.
Two key inputs into the real options valuation – the value of the underlying asset and the variance in that value – are often obtained from simulations.
To value a patent, for instance, we need to assess the present value of cash flows from developing the patent today and the variance in that value, given the uncertainty about the inputs.
Since the underlying product is not traded, it is difficult to get either of these inputs from the market.
A Monte Carlo simulation can provide both values.

 As we noted in the introductory section, there are three types of options embedded in investments – the option to expand, delay and abandon an investment.
In this section, we will consider each of these options and how they made add value to an investment, as well as potential implications for valuation and risk management.

 Investments are typically analyzed based upon their expected cash flows and discount rates at the time of the analysis; the net present value computed on that basis is a measure of its value and acceptability at that time.
The rule that emerges is a simple one: negative net present value investments destroy value and should not be accepted.
Expected cash flows and discount rates change over time, however, and so does the net present value.
Thus, a project that has a negative net present value now may have a positive net present value in the future.
In a competitive environment, in which individual firms have no special advantages over their competitors in taking projects, this may not seem significant.
In an environment in which a project can be taken by only one firm

 1 Copeland, T.E.
and V.
Antikarov, 2003, Real Options: A Practitioner’s Guide, Texere.
For an alternate path to the same conclusion, see Brandao, L.E., J.S.
Dyer and W.J.
Huhn, 2005, Using Binomial Decision Trees to Solve Real-Option Valuation Problems, Decision Analysis, v2, 69-88.
They use the risk-neutral probabilities from the option pricing model in the decision tree to solve for the option’s value.(because of legal restrictions or other barriers to entry to competitors), however, the changes in the project’s value over time give it the characteristics of a call option.In the abstract, assume that a project requires an initial up-front investment of X, and that the present value of expected cash inflows computed right now is V.
The net present value of this project is the difference between the two:

 Now assume that the firm has exclusive rights to this project for the next n years, and that the present value of the cash inflows may change over that time, because of changes in either the cash flows or the discount rate.
Thus, the project may have a negative net present value right now, but it may still be a good project if the firm waits.
Defining V again as the present value of the cash flows, the firm’s decision rule on this project can be summarized as follows:V > X Take the project: Project has positive net present value

 V < X Do not take the project: Project has negative net present value If the firm does not invest in the project, it incurs no additional cash flows, though it will lose what it originally invested in the project.
This relationship can be presented in a payoff diagram of cash flows on this project, as shown in Figure 8.3, assuming that the firm holds out until the end of the period for which it has exclusive rights to the project:22 McDonald, R.
and D.
Siegel, 2002, The Value of Waiting to Invest, Quarterly Journal of Economics, v101, 707-728.

 Note that this payoff diagram is that of a call option –– the underlying asset is the investment, the strike price of the option is the initial outlay needed to initiate the investment; and the life of the option is the period for which the firm has rights to the investment.
The present value of the cash flows on this project and the expected variance in this present value represent the value and variance of the underlying asset.Valuing an Option to Delay

 On the surface, the inputs needed to value the option to delay are the same as those needed for any option.
We need the value of the underlying asset, the variance in that value, the time to expiration on the option, the strike price, the riskless rate and the equivalent of the dividend yield (cost of delay).
Actually estimating these inputs for a real option to delay can be difficult, however.

 a.
Value Of The Underlying Asset: In this case, the underlying asset is the investment itself.
The current value of this asset is the present value of expected cash flows from initiating the project now, not including the up-front investment, which can be obtained by doing a standard capital budgeting analysis.
There is likely to be a substantial amount of error in the cash flow estimates and the present value, however.
Rather than being viewed as a problem, this uncertainty should be viewed as the reason why the project delay option has value.
If the expected cash flows on the project were known withcertainty and were not expected to change, there would be no need to adopt an option pricing framework, since there would be no value to the option.

 b.
Variance in the value of the asset: The present value of the expected cashflows that measures the value of the asset will change over time, partly because the potential market size for the product may be unknown, and partly because technological shifts can change the cost structure and profitability of the product.
The variance in the present value of cash flows from the project can be estimated in one of three ways.

 The value of the option is largely derived from the variance in cash flows - the higher the variance, the higher the value of the project delay option.
Thus, the value of an option to delay a project in a stable business will be less than the value of a similar option in an environment where technology, competition and markets are all changing rapidly.
c.
Exercise Price On Option: A project delay option is exercised when the firm owning the rights to the project decides to invest in it.
The cost of making this investment is the exercise price of the option.
The underlying assumption is that this cost remains constant (in present value dollars) and that any uncertainty associated with the product is reflected in the present value of cash flows on the product.d.
Expiration Of The Option And The Riskless Rate The project delay option expires when the rights to the project lapse; investments made after the project rights expire are

 assumed to deliver a net present value of zero as competition drives returns down to the required rate.
The riskless rate to use in pricing the option should be the rate that corresponds to the expiration of the option.
While this input can be estimated easily when firms have the explicit right to a project (through a license or a patent, for instance), it becomes far more difficult to obtain when firms only have a competitive advantage to take a project.

 d.
Cost of Delay (Dividend Yield): There is a cost to delaying taking a project, once the net present value turns positive.
Since the project rights expire after a fixed period, and excess profits (which are the source of positive present value) are assumed to disappear after that time as new competitors emerge, each year of delay translates into one less year of value-creating cash flows.3 If the cash flows are evenly distributed over time, and the exclusive rights last n years, the cost of delay can be written as:

 Thus, if the project rights are for 20 years, the annual cost of delay works out to 5% a year.
Note, though, that this cost of delay rises each year , to 1/19 in year 2, 1/18 in year 3 and so on, making the cost of delaying exercise larger over time.Practical Considerations

 While it is quite clear that the option to delay is embedded in many investments, there are several problems associated with the use of option pricing models to value these options.
First, the underlying asset in this option, which is the project, is not traded, making it difficult to estimate its value and variance.
We would argue that the value can be estimated from the expected cash flows and the discount rate for the project, albeit with error.
The variance is more difficult to estimate, however, since we are attempting the estimate a variance in project value over time.Second, the behavior of prices over time may not conform to the price path assumed by the option pricing models.
In particular, the assumption that prices move in small increments continuously (an assumption of the Black-Scholes model), and that thevariance in value remains unchanged over time, may be difficult to justify in the context of a real investment.
For instance, a sudden technological change may dramatically change the value of a project, either positively or negatively.

 Third, there may be no specific period for which the firm has rights to the project.
For instance, a firm may have significant advantages over its competitors, which may, in turn, provide it with the virtually exclusive rights to a project for a period of time.
The rights are not legal restrictions, however, and could erode faster than expected.
In such cases, the expected life of the project itself is uncertain and only an estimate.
Ironically, uncertainty about the expected life of the option can increase the variance in present value, and through it, the expected value of the rights to the project.Applications of Option to Delay

 The option to delay provides interesting perspectives on two common investment problems.
The first is in the valuation of patents, especially those that are not viable today but could be viable in the future; by extension, this will also allow us to look at whether R&D expenses are delivering value.
The second is in the analysis of natural resource assets – vacant land, undeveloped oil reserves etc.

 A product patent provides a firm with the right to develop and market a product.
The firm will do so only if the present value of the expected cash flows from the product sales exceed the cost of development, however, as shown in Figure 8.4.
If this does not occur, the firm can shelve the patent and not incur any further costs.
If I is the present value of the costs of developing the product, and V is the present value of the expected cash flows from development, the payoffs from owning a product patent can be written as:Payoff from owning a product patent = V - I if V> IThus, a product patent can be viewed as a call option, where the product itself is theunderlying asset.44 Schwartz, E., 2002, Patents and R&D as Real Options, Working Paper, Anderson School at UCLA.to productPresent value of expected cashflows on product

 We will illustrate the use of option pricing to value Avonex, a drug to treat multiple sclerosis, right after it had received FDA approval in 1997, but before its parent company, Biogen, had decided whether to commercialize the drug or nto.
We arrived at the following estimates for use in the option pricing model:Based on these assumptions, we obtained the following inputs to the option pricing model.Present Value of Cash Flows from Introducing Drug Now = S = $ 3.422 billion Initial Cost of Developing Drug for commercial use = K = $ 2.875 billion Patent life = t = 17 years Riskless Rate = r = 6.7% (17-year T.Bond rate) Variance in Expected Present Values =σ2 = 0.224Expected Cost of Delay = y = 1/17 = 5.89%

 Using these inputs in an option pricing model, we derived a value of $907 million for the option,5 and this can be considered to be the real options value attached to the patent on Avonex.
To provide a contrast, the net present value of this patent is only $ 547 million:NPV = $3,422 million - $ 2,875 million = $ 547 million

 The time premium of $ 360 million ($907 million -$547 million) on this option suggests that the firm will be better off waiting rather than developing the drug immediately, the cost of delay notwithstanding.
However, the cost of delay will increase over time, and make exercise (development) more likely.
Note also that we are assuming that the firm is protected from all competition for the life of the patent.
In reality, there are other pharmaceutical firms working on their own drugs to treat multiple sclerosis and that can affect both the option value and the firm’s behavior.
In particular, if we assume that Upjohn or Pfizer has a competing drug working through the FDA pipeline and that the drug is expected to reach the market in 6 years, the cost of delay will increase to 16.67% (1/6) and the option value will dissipate.

 The implications of viewing patents as options can be significant.
First, it implies that non-viable patents will continue to have value, especially in businesses where there is substantial volatility.
Second, it indicates that firms may hold off on developing viable patents, if they feel that they gain more from waiting than they lose in terms of cash flows; this behavior will be more common if there is no significant competition on the horizon.
Third, the value of patents will be higher in risky businesses than in safe businesses, since option value increases with volatility.
If we consider R&D to be the expense associated with acquiring these patents, this would imply that research shouldhave its biggest payoff when directed to areas where less is known and there is more uncertainty.
Consequently, we should expect pharmaceutical firms to spend more of their R&D budgets on gene therapy than on flu vaccines.6Natural Resource Options

 In a natural resource investment, the underlying asset is the natural resource and the value of the asset is based upon two variables - (1) the estimated quantity, and (2) the price of the resource.
Thus, in a gold mine, for example, the value of the underlying asset is the value of the estimated gold reserves in the mine, based upon the current price of gold.
In most such investments, there is an initial cost associated with developing the resource; the difference between the value of the asset extracted and the cost of the development is the profit to the owner of the resource (see Figure 8.5).
Defining the cost of development as X, and the estimated value of the developed resource as V, the potential payoffs on a natural resource option can be written as follows:Thus, the investment in a natural resource option has a payoff function similar to a call option.7

 5 This value was derived from using a Black Scholes model with these inputs.
With a binomial model, the estimated value increases slightly to $915 million.
6 Pakes, A., 1986, Patents as Options: Some Estimates of the Value of Holding European Patent Stocks, Econometrica, v54, 755-784.
While this paper does not explicitly value patents as options, it examines the returns investors would have earned investing in companies that derive their value from patents.
The return distribution resembles that of a portfolio of options, with most investments losing money but the winners providing disproportionate gains.
7 Brennan, M.
and E.
Schwartz, 1985, Evaluating Natural Resource Investments, The Journal of Business, v58, 135-157.Figure 8.5: Payoff from Developing Natural Resource Reserves1.
Available reserves of the resource: Since this is not known with certainty at the outset, it has to be estimated.
In an oil tract, for instance, geologists can provide reasonably accurate estimates of the quantity of oil available in the tract.2.
Estimated cost of developing the resource: The estimated development cost is the exercise price of the option.
Again, a combination of knowledge about past costs and the specifics of the investment have to be used to come up with a reasonable measure of development cost.

 3.
Time to expiration of the option: The life of a natural resource option can be defined in one of two ways.
First, if the ownership of the investment has to be relinquished at the end of a fixed period of time, that period will be the life of the option.
In many offshore oil leases, for instance, the oil tracts are leased to the oil company for several years.
The second approach is based upon the inventory of the resource and the capacity output rate, as well as estimates of the number of years it would take to exhaust the inventory.
Thus, a gold mine with a mine inventory of 3 million ounces and a capacity output rate of 150,000 ounces a year will be exhausted in 20 years, which is defined as the life of thenatural resource option.onreserveestimated reserveresource

 4.
Variance in value of the underlying asset: The variance in the value of the underlying asset is determined by two factors – (1) variability in the price of the resource, and (2) variability in the estimate of available reserves.
In the special case where the quantity of the reserve is known with certainty, the variance in the underlying asset's value will depend entirely upon the variance in the price of the natural resource.
In the more realistic case where the quantity of the reserve and the oil price can change over time, the option becomes more difficult to value; here, the firm may have to invest in stages to exploit the reserves.

 5.
Cost of Delay: The net production revenue as a percentage of the market value of the reserve is the equivalent of the dividend yield and is treated the same way in calculating option values.
An alternative way of thinking about this cost is in terms of a cost of delay.
Once a natural resource option is in-the-money (Value of the reserves > Cost of developing these reserves), the firm, by not exercising the option, is costing itself the production revenue it could have generated by developing the reserve.

 An important issue in using option pricing models to value natural resource options is the effect of development lags on the value of these options.
Since the resources cannot be extracted instantaneously, a time lag has to be allowed between the decision to extract the resources and the actual extraction.
A simple adjustment for this lag is to reduce the value of the developed reserve to reflect the loss of cash flows during the development period.
Thus, if there is a one-year lag in development, the current value of the developed reserve will be discounted back one year at the net production revenue/asset value ratio8 (which we also called the dividend yield above).9

 To illustrate the use of option pricing to value natural reserves, consider an offshore oil property with an estimated reserve of 50 million barrels of oil; the cost of developing the reserve is expected to be $ 600 million, and the development lag is two years.
The firm has the rights to exploit this reserve for the next 20 years, and the

 8 Intuitively, it may seem like the discounting should occur at the riskfree rate.
The simplest way of explaining why we discount at the dividend yield is to consider the analogy with a listed option on a stock.
Assume that on exercising a listed option on a stock, you had to wait six months for the stock to be delivered to you.
What you lose is the dividends you would have received over the six-month period by holding the stock.
Hence, the discounting is at the dividend yield.
9 Brennan, M.J., and E.S.
Schwartz, 1985, Evaluating Natural Resource Investments, Journal of Business 58, pp.
135-157.

 marginal value per barrel of oil is $12 currently10 (price per barrel - marginal cost per barrel).
Once developed, the net production revenue each year will be 5% of the value of the reserves.
The riskless rate is 8%, and the variance in ln(oil prices) is 0.03.
Given this information, the inputs to the option pricing model can be estimated as follows:Current Value of the asset = S = Value of the developed reserve discounted back the length of the development lag at the dividend yield = $12 * 50 /(1.05)2 = $If development is started today, the oil will not be available for sale until two years from now.
The estimated opportunity cost of this delay is the lost production revenue over the delay period; hence, the discounting of the reserve back at the dividend yield.Exercise Price = Cost of developing reserve = $ 600 million (assumed to be both known and fixed over time)Time to expiration on the option = 20 yearsIn this example, we assume that the only uncertainty is in the price of oil, and the variance therefore becomes the variance in oil prices.Variance in the value of the underlying asset (oil) = 0.03Riskless rate =8%Dividend Yield = Net production revenue / Value of reserve = 5%Based upon these inputs, the option pricing model yields an estimate of value of $97.08 million.11 This oil reserve, though not viable at current prices, is still a valuable property because of its potential to create value if oil prices go up.12The same type of analysis can be extended to any other commodity company (gold and copper reserves, for instance) and even to vacant land or real estate properties.

 10 For simplicity, we will assume that while this marginal value per barrel of oil will grow over time, the present value of the marginal value will remain unchanged at $ 12 per barrel.
If we do not make this assumption, we will have to estimate the present value of the oil that will be extracted over the extraction period.
11 This is the estimate from a Black-Scholes model, with a dividend yield adjustment.
Using a binomial model yields an estimate of value of $ 101 million.
12 Paddock, J.L.
& D.
R.
Siegel & J.L.
Smith (1988): “Option Valuation of Claims on Real Assets: The Case of Offshore Petroleum Leases”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1988, pp.479-508.
This paper provides a detailed examination of the application of real options to value oil reserves.
They applied the model to examine the prices paid for offshore oil leases in the US in 1980 and concluded that companies over paid (relative to the option value).The owner of vacant land in Manhattan can choose whether and when to develop the land and will make that decision based upon real estate values.
13What are the implications of viewing natural resource reserves as options? The

 first is that the value of a natural resource company can be written as a sum of two values: the conventional risk adjusted value of expected cash flows from developed reserves and the option value of undeveloped reserves.
While both will increase in value as the price of the natural resource increases, the latter will respond positively to increases in price volatility.
Thus, the values of oil companies should increase if oil prices become more volatile, even if oil prices themselves do not go up.
The second is that conventional discounted cash flow valuation will understate the value of natural resource companies, even if the expected cash flows are unbiased and reasonable because it will miss the option premium inherent in their undeveloped reserves.
The third is that development of natural resource reserves will slow down as the volatility in prices increases; the time premium on the options will increase, making exercise of the options (development of the reserves) less likely.

 Mining and commodity companies have been at the forefront in using real options in decision making and their usage of the technology predates the current boom in real options.
One reason is that natural resource options come closest to meeting the pre- requisites for the use of option pricing models.
Firms can learn a great deal by observing commodity prices and can adjust their behavior (in terms of development and exploration) quickly.
In addition, if we consider exclusivity to be a pre-requisite for real options to have value, that exclusivity for natural resource options derives from their natural scarcity; there is, after all, only a finite amount of oil and gold under the ground and vacant land in Manhattan.
Finally, natural resource reserves come closest to meeting the arbitrage/replication requirements that option pricing models are built upon; both the underlying asset (the natural resource) and the option can often be bought and sold.13 Quigg, L, 1993] Empirical Testing of Real Option-Pricing Models », Journal of Finance, vol.48, 621- 640.
The author examined transaction data on 2700 undeveloped and 3200 developed real estate properties between 1976-79 and found evidence of a premium arising from the option to wait in the former.

 In some cases, a firm will take an investment because doing so allows it either to make other investments or to enter other markets in the future.
In such cases, it can be argued that the initial investment provides the firm with an option to expand, and the firm should therefore be willing to pay a price for such an option.
Consequently, a firm may be willing to lose money on the first investment because it perceives the option to expand as having a large enough value to compensate for the initial loss.

 To examine this option, assume that the present value of the expected cash flows from entering the new market or taking the new project is V, and the total investment needed to enter this market or take this project is X.
Further, assume that the firm has a fixed time horizon, at the end of which it has to make the final decision on whether or not to take advantage of this opportunity.
Finally, assume that the firm cannot move forward on this opportunity if it does not take the initial investment.
This scenario implies the option payoffs shown in Figure 8.6.Consider a simple example of an option to expand.
Disney is considering starting

 a Spanish version of the Disney Channel in Mexico and estimates the net present value of this investment to be -$150 million.
While the negative net present value would normally suggest that rejecting the investment is the best course, assume that if the Mexican venture does better than expected, Disney plans to expand the network to the rest of South America at a cost of $ 500 million.
Based on its current assessment of this market, Disney believes that the present value of the expected cash flows on this investment is only $ 400 million (making it a negative net present value investment as well).
The saving grace is that the latter present value is an estimate and Disney does not have a firm grasp of the market; a Monte Carlo simulation of the investments yields a standard deviation of 50% in value.
Finally, assume that Disney will have to make this expansion decision within 5 years of the Mexican investment, and that the five-year riskfree rate is 4%.
The value of the expansion option can now be computed using the inputs:S = Present value of expansion cash flows = $ 400 millionK = Cost of expansion = $ 500 millionσ = Standard deviation in value (from simulation) = 50%t = 5 yearsr = 4%The resulting option value is $167 million.14

 The practical considerations associated with estimating the value of the option to expand are similar to those associated with valuing the option to delay.
In most cases, firms with options to expand have no specific time horizon by which they have to make an expansion decision, making these open-ended options, or, at best, options with arbitrary lives.
Even in those cases where a life can be estimated for the option, neither the size nor the potential market for the product may be known, and estimating either can be problematic.
To illustrate, consider the Disney example discussed above.
While we adopted a period of five years, at the end of which the Disney has to decide one way or another on its future expansion into South America, it is entirely possible that this time frame is not specified at the time the store is opened.
Furthermore, we have assumed that14 This value was computed using the Black-Scholes model.
A binomial model yields a similar value.both the cost and the present value of expansion are known initially.
In reality, the firm may not have good estimates for either before making the first investment, since it does not have much information on the underlying market.

 The option to expand is implicitly used by firms to rationalize taking investments that have negative net present value, but provide significant opportunities to tap into new markets or sell new products.
While the option pricing approach adds rigor to this argument by estimating the value of this option, it also provides insight into those occasions when it is most valuable.
In general, the option to expand is clearly more valuable for more volatile businesses with higher returns on projects (such as biotechnology or computer software), than in stable businesses with lower returns (such as housing, utilities or automobile production).
Specifically, the option to expand is at the basis of arguments that an investment should be made because of strategic considerations or that large investments should be broken up into smaller phases.
It can also be considered a rationale for why firms may accumulate cash or hold back on borrowing, thus preserving financial flexibility.Strategic ConsiderationsIn many acquisitions or investments, the acquiring firm believes that the transaction will give it competitive advantages in the future.
These competitive advantages range the gamut, and include:

 While all of these potential advantages may be used to justify initial investments that do not meet financial benchmarks, not all of them create valuable options.
The value of the option is derived from the degree to which these competitive advantages, assuming that they do exist, translate into sustainable excess returns.
As a consequence, these advantages can be used to justify premiums only in cases where the acquiring firm believes that it has some degree of exclusivity in the targeted market or technology.
Two examples can help illustrate this point.
A telecommunications firm should be willing to pay a premium for Chinese telecomm firm, if the latter has exclusive rights to service a large segment of the Chinese market; the option to expand in the Chinese market could be worth a significant amount.15 On the other hand, a developed market retailer should be wary about paying a real option premium for an Indian retail firm, even though it may believe that the Indian market could grow to be a lucrative one.
The option to expand into this lucrative market is open to all entrants and not just to existing retailers and thus maynot translate into sustainable excess returns.Multi-Stage Projects/ Investments

 When entering new businesses or making new investments, firms sometimes have the option to enter the business in stages.
While doing so may reduce potential upside, it also protects the firm against downside risk, by allowing it, at each stage, to gauge demand and decide whether to go on to the next stage.
In other words, a standard project can be recast as a series of options to expand, with each option being dependent on the previous one.
There are two propositions that follow:

 The gain in value from the options created by multi-stage investments has to be weighed off against the cost.
Taking investments in stages may allow competitors who decide to enter the market on a full scale to capture the market.
It may also lead to higher costs at each stage, since the firm is not taking full advantage of economies of scale.There are several implications that emerge from viewing this choice between multi-stage and one-time investments in an option framework.
The projects where the gains will be largest from making the investment in multiple stages include:

 15 A note of caution needs to be added here.
If the exclusive rights to a market come with no pricing power – in other words, the Government will set the price you charge your customers – it may very well translate into zero excess returns (and no option value).
16 Hsu, Y., 2002, Staging of Venture Capital Investment: A Real Options Analysis, Working paper, University of Cambridge.Growth Companies

 In the stock market boom in the 1990s, we witnessed the phenomenon of young, start-up, internet companies with large market capitalizations but little to show in terms of earnings, cash flows or even revenues.
Conventional valuation models suggested that it would be difficult, if not impossible, to justify these market valuations with expected cash flows.
In an interesting twist on the option to expand argument, there were some who argued that investors in these companies were buying options to expand and be part of a potentially huge e-commerce market, rather than conventional stock.17

 While the argument is alluring and serves to pacify investors in growth companies who may feel that they are paying too much, there are clearly dangers in making this stretch.
The biggest one is that the “exclusivity” component that is necessary for real options to have value is being given short shrift.
Consider investing in an internet stock in 1999 and assume that you are paying a premium to be part of a potentially large online market in 2008.
Assume further that this market comes to fruition.
Could you partake in this market without paying that upfront premium a dot-com company? We don’t see why not.
After all, GE and Nokia are just as capable of being part of this online market, as are any number of new entrants into the market.18Financial Flexibility

 When making decisions about how much to borrow and how much cash to return to stockholders (in dividends and stock buybacks), managers should consider the effects such decisions will have on their capacity to make new investments or meet unanticipated contingencies in future periods.
Practically, this translates into firms maintaining excess debt capacity or larger cash balances than are warranted by current needs, to meet unexpected future requirements.
While maintaining this financing flexibility has value to firms, it also has costs; the large cash balances might earn below market returns, and excess debt capacity implies that the firm is giving up some value by maintaining a higher cost of capital.

 17 Schwartz, E.S.
and M.
Moon, 2001, Rational Pricing of Internet Companies Revisited, The Financial Review 36, pp.
7-26.
A simpler version of the same argument was made in Mauboussin, M., 1998, Get Real: Using Real Options in Security Analysis, CSFB Publication, June 23, 1999.
18 This argument is fleshed out in my book, “The Dark Side of Valuation”, published by Prentice-Hall.Using an option framework, it can be argued that a firm that maintains a large

 cash balance and preserves excess debt capacity is doing so to have the option to take unexpected projects with high returns that may arise in the future.
To value financial flexibility as an option, consider the following framework: A firm has expectations about how much it will need to reinvest in future periods, based upon its own past history and current conditions in the industry.
On the other side of the ledger, a firm also has expectations about how much it can raise from internal funds and its normal access to capital markets in future periods.
Assume that there is actual reinvestment needs can be very different from the expected reinvestment needs; for simplicity, we will assume that the capacity to generate funds is known to the firm.
The advantage (and value) of having excess debt capacity or large cash balances is that the firm can meet any reinvestment needs in excess of funds available using its excess debt capacity and surplus cash.
The payoff from these projects, however, comes from the excess returns that the firm expectsto make on them.Looking at financial flexibility as an option yields valuable insights on when financial flexibility is most valuable.
Using the framework developed above, for instance, we would argue that:cash balances.flexibility.

 In conventional corporate finance, the optimal debt ratio is the one that minimizes the cost of capital and there is little incentive for firms to accumulate cash balances.
This view of the world, though, flows directly from the implicit assumption we make that capital markets are open and can be accessed with little or no cost.
Introducing external capital constraints, internal or external, into the model leads to a more nuanced analysis where rational firms may borrow less than optimal and hold back on returning cash to stockholders.

 The final option to consider here is the option to abandon a project when its cash flows do not measure up to expectations.
One way to reflect this value is through decision trees, as evidenced in chapter 6.
The decision tree has limited applicability in most real world investment analyses; it typically works only for multi-stage projects, and it requires inputs on probabilities at each stage of the project.
The option pricing approach provides a more general way of estimating and building in the value of abandonment into investment analysis.
To illustrate, assume that V is the remaining value on a project if it continues to the end of its life, and L is the liquidation or abandonment value for the same

 project at the same point in time.
If the project has a life of n years, the value of continuing the project can be compared to the liquidation (abandonment) value.
If the value from continuing is higher, the project should be continued; if the value of abandonment is higher, the holder of the abandonment option could consider abandoning the project .Payoff from owning an abandonment option = 0 if V > LThese payoffs are graphed in Figure 8.8, as a function of the expected value from continuing the investment.option.

 Consider a simple example.
Assume that a firm is considering taking a 10-year project that requires an initial investment of $ 100 million in a real estate partnership, where the present value of expected cash flows is $ 110 million.
While the net present value of $ 10 million is small, assume that the firm has the option to abandon this project anytime in the next 10 years, by selling its share of the ownership to the other partners in the venture for $ 50 million.
Assume that the variance in the present value of the expected cash flows from being in the partnership is 0.09.The value of the abandonment option can be estimated by determining the characteristics of the put option:Value of the Underlying Asset (S) = PV of Cash Flows from Project= $ 110 millionStrike Price (K) = Salvage Value from Abandonment = $ 50 millionVariance in Underlying Asset’s Value = 0.06Time to expiration = Period for which the firm has abandonment option = 10 years The project has a 25-year life and is expected to lose value each year; for simplicity, we will assume that the loss is linear (4% a year).Loss in value each year = 1/n = 1/25 = 4%Assume that the ten-year riskless rate is 6%.
The value of the put option can be estimated as follows:Call Value = 110 exp(-.04)(10) (0.9737) -50 (exp(-0.06)(10) (0.8387) = $ 84.09 million

 The value of this abandonment option has to be added on to the net present value of the project of $ 10 million, yielding a total net present value with the abandonment option of $ 11.53 million.
Note though that abandonment becomes a more and more attractive option as the remaining project life decreases, since the present value of the remaining cash flows will decrease.

 In the above analysis, we assumed, rather unrealistically, that the abandonment value was clearly specified up front and that it did not change during the life of the project.
This may be true in some very specific cases, in which an abandonment option is built into the contract.
More often, however, the firm has the option to abandon, and the salvage value from doing so has to be estimated (with error) up front.
Further, the abandonment value may change over the life of the project, making it difficult to apply traditional option pricing techniques.
Finally, it is entirely possible that abandoning a project may not bring in a liquidation value, but may create costs instead; a manufacturing firm may have to pay severance to its workers, for instance.
In such cases, it would not make sense to abandon, unless the present value of the expected cash flows from continuing with the investment are even more negative.Implications

 The fact that the option to abandon has value provides a rationale for firms to build in operating flexibility to scale back or terminate projects if they do not measure up to expectations.
It also indicates that firms that focus on generating more revenues by offering their customers the option to walk away from commitments may be giving up more than they gain, in the process.1.
Escape Clauses

 When a firm enters into a long term risky investment that requires a large up front investment, it should do so with the clear understanding that it may regret making this investment fairly early in its life.
Being able to get out of such long-term commitments that threaten to drain more resources in the future is at the heart of the option to abandon.
It is true that some of this flexibility is determined by the business that you are in; getting out of bad investments is easier to do in service businesses than in heavy infrastructure businesses.
However, it is also true that there are actions that firms can take at the time of making these investments that give them more choices, if things do not go according to plan.

 The first and most direct way is to build operating flexibility contractually with those parties that are involved in the investment.
Thus, contracts with suppliers may be written on an annual basis, rather than long term, and employees may be hired on a temporary basis, rather than permanently.
The physical plant used for a project may be leased on a short-term basis, rather than bought, and the financial investment may be made in stages rather than as an initial lump sum.
While there is a cost to building in this flexibility, the gains may be much larger, especially in volatile businesses.
The initial capital investment can be shared with another investor, presumably with deeper pockets and a greater willingness to stay with the investment, even if it turns sour.
This provides a rationale for join venture investing, especially for small firms that have limited resources; finding a cash-rich, larger company to share the risk may well be worth the cost.None of these actions are costless.
Entering into short term agreements with suppliers and leasing the physical plant may be more expensive than committing for thelife of the investment, but that additional cost has to be weighed off against the benefit of maintaining the abandonment option.

 Firms that are intent on increasing revenues sometimes offer abandonment options to customers to induce them to buy their products and services.
As an example, consider a firm that sells its products on multi-year contracts and offers customers the option to cancel their contracts at any time, with no cost.
While this may sweeten the deal and increase sales, there is likely to be a substantial cost.
In the event of a recession, customers that are unable to meet their obligations are likely to cancel their contracts.
In effect, the firm has made its good times better and its bad times worse; the cost of this increased volatility in earnings and revenues has to be measured against the potential gain in revenue growth to see if the net effect is positive.

 This discussion should also act as a cautionary note for those firms that are run with marketing objectives such as maximizing market share or posting high revenue growth.
Those objectives can often be accomplished by giving valuable options to customers – sales people will want to meet their sales targets and are not particularly concerned about the long term costs they may create with their commitments to customers – and the firm may be worse off as a consequence.3.
Switching Options

 While the abandonment option considers the value of shutting an investment down entirely, there is an intermediate alternative that is worth examining.
Firms can sometimes alter production levels in response to demand and being able to do so can make an investment more valuable.
Consider, for instance, a power company that is considering a new plant to generate electricity and assume that the company can run the plant at full capacity and produce 1 million kilowatt hours of power or at half capacity (and substantially less cost) and produce 500,000 kilowatt hours of power.
In this case, the company can observe both the demand for power and the revenues per kilowatt-hour and decide whether it makes sense to run at full or half capacity.
The value of this switching option can then be compared to the cost of building in this flexibility in the firstplace.

 The airline business provides an interesting case study in how different companies manage their cost structure and the payoffs to their strategies.
One reason that Southwest Airlines has been able to maintain its profitability in a deeply troubled sector is that the company has made cost flexibility a central component in its decision process.
From its choice of using only one type of aircraft for its entire fleet19 to its refusal, for the most part, to fly into large urban airports (with high gate costs), the company’s operations have created the most flexible cost structure in the business.
Thus, when revenues dip (as they inevitably do at some point in time when the economy weakens), Southwest is able to trim its costs and stay profitable while other airlines teeter on the brink of bankruptcy.

 The discussion on the potential applications of real options should provide a window into why they are so alluring to practitioners and businesses.
In essence, we are ignoring that the time honored rules of capital budgeting, which include rejecting investments that have negative net present value, when real options are present.
Not only does the real options approach encourage you to make investments that do not meet conventional financial criteria, it also makes it more likely that you will do so, the less you know about the investment.
Ignorance, rather than being a weakness, becomes a virtue because it pushes up the uncertainty in the estimated value and the resulting option value.
To prevent the real options process from being hijacked by managers who want to rationalize bad (and risky) decisions, we have to impose some reasonable constraints on when it can be used and when it is used, how to estimate its value.First, not all investments have options embedded in them, and not all options, even if they do exist, have value.
To assess whether an investment creates valuable options that need to be analyzed and valued, three key questions need to be answered affirmatively.19 From its inception until recently, Southwest used the Boeing 737 as its workhorse, thus reducing its needanother firm for the patents, and it cannot get rights to an undeveloped oil reserve without bidding on it at a government auction or buying it from another oil company.
Clearly, the initial investment here (spending on R&D, bidding at the auction) is required for the firm to have the second option.
Now consider the Disney expansion into Mexico.
The initial investment in a Spanish channel provides Disney with information about market potential, without which presumably it is unwilling to expand into the larger South American market.
Unlike the patent and undeveloped reserves illustrations, the initial investment is not a pre-requisite for the second, though management might view it as such.
The connection gets even weaker when we look at one firm acquiring another to have the option to be able to enter a large market.
Acquiring an internet service provider to have a foothold in the internet retailing market or buying a Brazilian brewery to preserve the option to enter the Brazilian beer market would be examples of such transactions.the initial investment provide the firm with significant competitive advantages on subsequent investments? The value of the option ultimately derives not from the cash flows generated by then second and subsequent investments, but from the excess returns generated by these cash flows.
The greater the potential for excess returns on the second investment, the greater the value of the option in the first investment.
The potential for excess returns is closely tied to how much of a competitive advantage the first investment provides the firm when it takes subsequent investments.
At one extreme, again, consider investing in research and development to acquire a patent.
The patent gives the firm that owns it the exclusive rights to produce that product, and if the market potential is large, the right to the excess returns from the project.
At the other extreme, the firm might get no competitive advantages on subsequent investments, in which case, it is questionable as to whether there can be any excess returns on these investments.
In reality, most investments will fall in the continuum between these two extremes, with greater competitive advantages being associatedwith higher excess returns and larger option values.to maintain different maintenance crews at each airport it flies into.excess returns attract competitors, and competition drives out excess returns.
The more sustainable the competitive advantages possessed by a firm, the greater will be the value of the options embedded in the initial investment.
The sustainability of competitive advantages is a function of two forces.
The first is the nature of the competition; other things remaining equal, competitive advantages fade much more quickly in sectors where there are aggressive competitors and new entry into the business is easy.
The second is the nature of the competitive advantage.
If the resource controlled by the firm is finite and scarce (as is the case with natural resource reserves and vacant land), the competitive advantage is likely to be sustainable for longer periods.
Alternatively, if the competitive advantage comes from being the first mover in a market or technological expertise, it will come under assault far sooner.
The most direct way of reflecting this in the value of the option is in its life; the life of the option can be set to the period of competitive advantage and only the excess returns earned over this period counts towards the value of the option.

 Second, when real options are used to justify a decision, the justification has to be in more than qualitative terms.
In other words, managers who argue for taking a project with poor returns or paying a premium on an acquisition on the basis of real options, should be required to value these real options and show, in fact, that the economic benefits exceed the costs.
There will be two arguments made against this requirement.
The first is that real options cannot be easily valued, since the inputs are difficult to obtain and often noisy.
The second is that the inputs to option pricing models can be easily manipulated to back up whatever the conclusion might be.
While both arguments have some basis, an estimate with error is better than no estimate at all, and the process of quantitatively trying to estimate the value of a real option is, in fact, the first step to understanding what drives it value.

 There is one final note of caution that we should add about the use of option pricing models to assess the value of real options.
Option pricing models, be they of the binomial or Black Scholes variety, are based on two fundamental precepts – replication and arbitrage.
For either to be feasible, you have to be able to trade on the underlying asset and on the option.
This is easy to accomplish with a listed option on a traded stock;

 you can trade on both the stock and the listed option.
It is much more difficult to pull off when valuing a patent or an investment expansion opportunity; neither the underlying asset (the product that emerges from the patent) nor the option itself are traded.
This does not mean that you cannot estimate the value of a patent as an option but it does indicate that monetizing this value will be much more difficult to do.
In the Avonex example from earlier in the chapter, the option value for the patent was $907 million whereas the conventional risk adjusted value was only $547 million.
Much as you may believe in the former as the right estimate of value, it is unlikely that any potential buyer of the patent will come close to paying that amount.

 Given the different perspective on risk brought into the picture by real options, how do we fit this approach into the broader set of risk assessment tools and what role, if any, should it play in risk management? While there are some real options purists who view it as the answer to all of the problems that we face in managing risk, a more nuanced conclusion is merited.Real options have made an important contribution to the risk management debate

 by bringing in the potential upside in risk to offset the hand wringing generated by the downside.
It can also be viewed as a bridge between corporate finance and corporate strategy.
Historically, the former has been focused on how best to assess the value of risky assets in the interests of maximizing firm value, and the latter on the sources of competitive advantages and market potential.
The real option framework allows us to bring the rigors of financial analysis to corporate strategic analysis and link it up with value creation and maximization.
Finally, the real options approach reveals the value of maintaining flexibility in both operating and financial decisions.
By preserving the flexibility to both scale up an investment, in good scenarios, and to scale down or abandon the same investment, in down scenarios, a firm may be able to turn a bad investment into a good one.As we noted earlier in the chapter, though, the value of real options is greatest when you have exclusivity and dissipates quickly in competitive environments.
Consequently, real options will be most useful to firms that have significant competitive

 advantages and can therefore assume that they will be able to act alone or at least much earlier than their competition in response to new information.
It should come as no surprise that the real options approach has been used longest and with the most success, by mining and commodity companies.
The danger with extending the real options framework to all firms is that it will inevitably used to justify bad investments and decisions.

 If you decide to use the real option approach in risk management, it should not replace risk adjusted values or Monte Carlo simulations but should be viewed more as a supplement or a complement to these approaches.20 After all, to assess the value of Avonex, we began with the risk adjusted present value of the expected cash flows from the drug.
Similarly, to analyze the Disney expansion opportunity in South America, we drew on the output from Monte Carlo simulations.

 In contrast to the approaches that focus on downside risk – risk adjusted value, simulations and Value at Risk – the real options approach brings an optimistic view to uncertainty.
While conceding that uncertainty can create losses, it argues that uncertainty can also be exploited for potential gains and that updated information can be used to augment the upside and reduce the downside risks inherent in investments.
In essence, you are arguing that the conventional risk adjustment approaches fail to capture this flexibility and that you should be adding an option premium to the risk adjusted value.

 In this chapter, we considered three potential real options and applications of each.
The first is the option to delay, where a firm with exclusive rights to an investment has the option of deciding when to take that investment and to delay taking it, if necessary.
The second is the option to expand, where a firm may be willing to lose money on an initial investment, in the hope of expanding into other investments or markets further down the road.
The third is the option to abandon an investment, if it looks like a money loser, early in the process.20 For an example of how simulations and real options complement each other, see Gamba, A., 2002, Real Options Valuation: A Monte Carlo Approach, Working Paper, SSRN.

 While it is clearly appropriate to attach value to real options in some cases – patents, reserves of natural resources or exclusive licenses – the argument for an option premium gets progressively weaker as we move away from the exclusivity inherent in each of these cases.
In particular, a firm that invests into an emerging market in a money- losing enterprise, using the argument that that market is a large and potentially profitable one, could be making a serious mistake.
After all, the firm could be right in its assessment of the market, but absent barriers to entry, it may not be able to earn excess returns in that market or keep the competition out.
Not all opportunities are options and not all options have significant economic value.

 An option provides the holder with the right to buy or sell a specified quantity of an underlying asset at a fixed price (called a strike price or an exercise price) at or before the expiration date of the option.
Since it is a right and not an obligation, the holder can choose not to exercise the right and allow the option to expire.
There are two types of options - call options and put options.A call option gives the buyer of the option the right to buy the underlying asset at a

 fixed price, called the strike or the exercise price, at any time prior to the expiration date of the option: the buyer pays a price for this right.
If at expiration, the value of the asset is less than the strike price, the option is not exercised and expires worthless.
If, on the other hand, the value of the asset is greater than the strike price, the option is exercised - the buyer of the option buys the stock at the exercise price and the difference between the asset value and the exercise price comprises the gross profit on the investment.
The net profit on the investment is the difference between the gross profit and the price paid for the call initially.
A payoff diagram illustrates the cash payoff on an option at expiration.
For a call, the net payoff is negative (and equal to the price paid for the call) if the value of the underlying asset is less than the strike price.
If the price of the underlying asset exceeds the strike price, the gross payoff is the difference between the value of the underlying asset and the strike price, and the net payoff is the difference between thegross payoff and the price of the call.
This is illustrated in the figure 8A.1:

 A put option gives the buyer of the option the right to sell the underlying asset at a fixed price, again called the strike or exercise price, at any time prior to the expiration date of the option.
The buyer pays a price for this right.
If the price of the underlying asset is greater than the strike price, the option will not be exercised and will expire worthless.
If on the other hand, the price of the underlying asset is less than the strike price, the owner of the put option will exercise the option and sell the stock a the strike price, claiming the difference between the strike price and the market value of the asset as the gross profit.
Again, netting out the initial cost paid for the put yields the net profit from the transaction.
A put has a negative net payoff if the value of the underlying asset exceeds the strike price, and has a gross payoff equal to the difference between the strike price and the value of the underlying asset if the asset value is less than the strike price.This is summarized in figure 8A.2.the option to someone else than by exercising the options.21The value of an option is determined by a number of variables relating to the underlying asset and financial markets.

 21 While early exercise is not optimal generally, there are at least two exceptions to this rule.
One is a case where the underlying asset pays large dividends, thus reducing the value of the asset, and any call options on that asset.
In this case, call options may be exercised just before an ex-dividend date, if the time premium on the options is less than the expected decline in asset value as a consequence of the dividend payment.
The other exception arises when an investor holds both the underlying asset and deep in-the- money puts on that asset at a time when interest rates are high.
In this case, the time premium on the put may be less than the potential gain from exercising the put early and earning interest on the exercise price.

 1.
Current Value of the Underlying Asset : Options are assets that derive value from an underlying asset.
Consequently, changes in the value of the underlying asset affect the value of the options on that asset.
Since calls provide the right to buy the underlying asset at a fixed price, an increase in the value of the asset will increase the value of the calls.
Puts, on the other hand, become less valuable as the value of the asset increase.

 2.
Variance in Value of the Underlying Asset: The buyer of an option acquires the right to buy or sell the underlying asset at a fixed price.
The higher the variance in the value of the underlying asset, the greater the value of the option.
This is true for both calls and puts.
While it may seem counter-intuitive that an increase in a risk measure (variance) should increase value, options are different from other securities since buyers of options can never lose more than the price they pay for them; in fact, they have the potential to earn significant returns from large price movements.

 3.
Dividends Paid on the Underlying Asset: The value of the underlying asset can be expected to decrease if dividend payments are made on the asset during the life of the option.
Consequently, the value of a call on the asset is a decreasing function of the size of expected dividend payments, and the value of a put is an increasing function of expected dividend payments.
A more intuitive way of thinking about dividend payments, for call options, is as a cost of delaying exercise on in-the-money options.
To see why, consider a option on a traded stock.
Once a call option is in the money, i.e, the holder of the option will make a gross payoff by exercising the option, exercising the call option will provide the holder with the stock, and entitle him or her to the dividends on the stock in subsequent periods.
Failing to exercise the option will mean that these dividends are foregone.

 4.
Strike Price of Option: A key characteristic used to describe an option is the strike price.
In the case of calls, where the holder acquires the right to buy at a fixed price, the value of the call will decline as the strike price increases.
In the case of puts, where the holder has the right to sell at a fixed price, the value will increase as the strike price increases.5.
Time To Expiration On Option: Both calls and puts become more valuable as the time to expiration increases.
This is because the longer time to expiration provides more time for the value of the underlying asset to move, increasing the value of both types ofoptions.
Additionally, in the case of a call, where the buyer has to pay a fixed price at expiration, the present value of this fixed price decreases as the life of the option increases, increasing the value of the call.

 6.
Riskless Interest Rate Corresponding To Life Of Option: Since the buyer of an option pays the price of the option up front, an opportunity cost is involved.
This cost will depend upon the level of interest rates and the time to expiration on the option.
The riskless interest rate also enters into the valuation of options when the present value of the exercise price is calculated, since the exercise price does not have to be paid (received) until expiration on calls (puts).
Increases in the interest rate will increase the value of calls and reduce the value of puts.Table 8A.1 below summarizes the variables and their predicted effects on call and putprices.Table 8A.1: Summary of Variables Affecting Call and Put Prices

 Option pricing theory has made vast strides since 1972, when Black and Scholes published their path-breaking paper providing a model for valuing dividend-protected European options.
Black and Scholes used a “replicating portfolio” –– a portfolio composed of the underlying asset and the risk-free asset that had the same cash flows as the option being valued–– to come up with their final formulation.
While their derivation is mathematically complicated, there is a simpler binomial model for valuing options that draws on the same logic.The binomial option pricing model is based upon a simple formulation for the asset price process, in which the asset, in any time period, can move to one of two possible prices.
The general formulation of a stock price process that follows the binomial is shown in figure 8A.3.Figure 8A.3: General Formulation for Binomial Price Path

 The objective in creating a replicating portfolio is to use a combination of risk- free borrowing/lending and the underlying asset to create the same cash flows as the option being valued.
The principles of arbitrage apply here, and the value of the option must be equal to the value of the replicating portfolio.
In the case of the general formulation above, where stock prices can either move up to Su or down to Sd in any time period, the replicating portfolio for a call with strike price K will involve borrowing $B and acquiring ∆ of the underlying asset, where:∆ = Number of units of the underlying asset bought = (Cu - Cd)/(Su - Sd)Cu = Value of the call if the stock price is SuCd = Value of the call if the stock price is Sd

 In a multi-period binomial process, the valuation has to proceed iteratively; i.e., starting with the last time period and moving backwards in time until the current point in time.
The portfolios replicating the option are created at each step and valued, providing the values for the option in that time period.
The final output from the binomial option pricing model is a statement of the value of the option in terms of the replicating portfolio, composed of Δ shares (option delta) of the underlying asset and risk-free borrowing/lending.Value of the call = Current value of underlying asset * Option Delta - Borrowing needed to replicate the optionConsider a simple example.
Assume that the objective is to value a call with a strike price of 50, which is expected to expire in two time periods, on an underlying asset whose price currently is 50 and is expected to follow a binomial process:Now assume that the interest rate is 11%.
In addition, defineΔ = Number of shares in the replicating portfolioB = Dollars of borrowing in replicating portfolioThe objective is to combine Δ shares of stock and B dollars of borrowing to replicate the cash flows from the call with a strike price of $ 50.
This can be done iteratively, starting with the last period and working back through the binomial tree.Step 1: Start with the end nodes and work backwards:Thus, if the stock price is $70 at t=1, borrowing $45 and buying one share of the stock will give the same cash flows as buying the call.
The value of the call at t=1, if the stock price is $70, is therefore:Value of Call = Value of Replicating Position = 70 Δ - B = 70-45 = 25 Considering the other leg of the binomial tree at t=1,If the stock price is 35 at t=1, then the call is worth nothing.Step 2: Move backwards to the earlier time period and create a replicating portfolio that will provide the cash flows the option will provide.In other words, borrowing $22.5 and buying 5/7 of a share will provide the same cash flows as a call with a strike price of $50.
The value of the call therefore has to be the same as the value of this position.Value of Call = Value of replicating position = 5/7 X Current stock price - $ 22.5 =

 The binomial model provides insight into the determinants of option value.
The value of an option is not determined by the expected price of the asset but by its current price, which, of course, reflects expectations about the future.
This is a direct consequence of arbitrage.
If the option value deviates from the value of the replicating portfolio, investors can create an arbitrage position, i.e., one that requires no investment, involves no risk, and delivers positive returns.
To illustrate, if the portfolio that replicates the call costs more than the call does in the market, an investor could buy the call, sell the replicating portfiolio and be guaranteed the difference as a profit.
The cash flows on the two positions will offset each other, leading to no cash flows in subsequent periods.
The option value also increases as the time to expiration is extended, as the price movements (u and d) increase, and with increases in the interest rate.

 The binomial model is a discrete-time model for asset price movements, including a time interval (t) between price movements.
As the time interval is shortened, the limiting distribution, as t approaches 0, can take one of two forms.
If as t approaches 0, price changes become smaller, the limiting distribution is the normal distribution and the

 price process is a continuous one.
If as t approaches 0, price changes remain large, the limiting distribution is the Poisson distribution, i.e., a distribution that allows for price jumps.
The Black-Scholes model applies when the limiting distribution is the normal distribution,22 and it explicitly assumes that the price process is continuous.The Model

 The original Black and Scholes model was designed to value European options, which were dividend-protected.
Thus, neither the possibility of early exercise nor the payment of dividends affects the value of options in this model.
The value of a call option in the Black-Scholes model can be written as a function of the following variables:S = Current value of the underlying assetK = Strike price of the optiont = Life to expiration of the optionr = Riskless interest rate corresponding to the life of the optionThe model itself can be written as:whered2 = d1 - σ √tThe process of valuation of options using the Black-Scholes model involves the following steps:Step 1: The inputs to the Black-Scholes are used to estimate d1 and d2.Step 2: The cumulative normal distribution functions, N(d1) and N(d2), corresponding tothese standardized normal variables are estimated.

 22 Stock prices cannot drop below zero, because of the limited liability of stockholders in publicly listed firms.
Hence, stock prices, by themselves, cannot be normally distributed, since a normal distribution requires some probability of infinitely negative values.
The distribution of the natural logs of stock prices is assumed to be log-normal in the Black-Scholes model.
This is why the variance used in this model is the variance in the log of stock prices.Step 3: The present value of the exercise price is estimated, using the continuous time version of the present value formulation:Step 4: The value of the call is estimated from the Black-Scholes model.

 The determinants of value in the Black-Scholes are the same as those in the binomial - the current value of the stock price, the variability in stock prices, the time to expiration on the option, the strike price, and the riskless interest rate.
The principle of replicating portfolios that is used in binomial valuation also underlies the Black-Scholes model.
In fact, embedded in the Black-Scholes model is the replicating portfolio.N(d1), which is the number of shares that are needed to create the replicating portfolio is called the option delta.
This replicating portfolio is self-financing and has the same value as the call at every stage of the option's life.Model Limitations and FixesThe version of the Black-Scholes model presented above does not take into account the possibility of early exercise or the payment of dividends, both of which impact the value of options.
Adjustments exist, which while not perfect, provide partial corrections to value.1.
Dividends

 The payment of dividends reduces the stock price.
Consequently, call options will become less valuable and put options more valuable as dividend payments increase.
One approach to dealing with dividends to estimate the present value of expected dividends paid by the underlying asset during the option life and subtract it from the current value of the asset to use as “S” in the model.
Since this becomes impractical as the option life becomes longer, we would suggest an alternate approach.
If the dividend yield (y = dividends/ current value of the asset) of the underlying asset is expected to remain unchanged during the life of the option, the Black-Scholes model can be modified to take dividends into account.whered2 = d1 - σ √t

 From an intuitive standpoint, the adjustments have two effects.
First, the value of the asset is discounted back to the present at the dividend yield to take into account the expected drop in value from dividend payments.
Second, the interest rate is offset by the dividend yield to reflect the lower carrying cost from holding the stock (in the replicating portfolio).
The net effect will be a reduction in the value of calls, with the adjustment, and an increase in the value of puts.2.
Early Exercise

 The Black-Scholes model is designed to value European options, whereas most options that we consider are American options, which can be exercised anytime before expiration.
Without working through the mechanics of valuation models, an American option should always be worth at least as much and generally more than a European option because of the early exercise option.
There are three basic approaches for dealing with the possibility of early exercise.
The first is to continue to use the unadjusted Black- Scholes, and regard the resulting value as a floor or conservative estimate of the true value.
The second approach is to value the option to each potential exercise date.
With options on stocks, this basically requires that we value options to each ex-dividend day and chooses the maximum of the estimated call values.
The third approach is to use a modified version of the binomial model to consider the possibility of early exercise.

 While it is difficult to estimate the prices for each node of a binomial, there is a way in which variances estimated from historical data can be used to compute the expected up and down movements in the binomial.
To illustrate, if σ2 is the variance in ln(stock prices), the up and down movements in the binomial can be estimated as follows:u = Exp [(r - σ2/2)(T/m) + √(σ2T/m)]d = Exp [(r - σ2/2)(T/m) - √(σ2T/m)]

 where u and d are the up and down movements per unit time for the binomial, T is the life of the option and m is the number of periods within that lifetime.
Multiplying the stock price at each stage by u and d will yield the up and the down prices.
These can then be used to value the asset.3.
The Impact Of Exercise On The Value Of The Underlying Asset

 The derivation of the Black-Scholes model is based upon the assumption that exercising an option does not affect the value of the underlying asset.
This may be true for listed options on stocks, but it is not true for some types of options.
For instance, the exercise of warrants increases the number of shares outstanding and brings fresh cash into the firm, both of which will affect the stock price.23 The expected negative impact (dilution) of exercise will decrease the value of warrants compared to otherwise similar call options.
The adjustment for dilution in the Black-Scholes to the stock price is fairly simple.
The stock price is adjusted for the expected dilution from the exercise of the options.
In the case of warrants, for instance:whereS = Current value of the stock nw = Number of warrants outstandingW = Market value of warrants outstanding ns = Number of shares outstandingWhen the warrants are exercised, the number of shares outstanding will increase, reducing the stock price.
The numerator reflects the market value of equity, including both stocks and warrants outstanding.
The reduction in S will reduce the value of the calloption.

 There is an element of circularity in this analysis, since the value of the warrant is needed to estimate the dilution-adjusted S and the dilution-adjusted S is needed to estimate the value of the warrant.
This problem can be resolved by starting the process off with an estimated value of the warrant (say, the exercise value), and then iterating with the new estimated value for the warrant until there is convergence.23 Warrants are call options issued by firms, either as part of management compensation contracts or to raise equity.Valuing PutsThe value of a put is can be derived from the value of a call with the same strike price and the same expiration date through an arbitrage relationship that specifies that:C - P = S - K e-rtwhere C is the value of the call and P is the value of the put (with the same life and exercise price).This arbitrage relationship can be derived fairly easily and is called put-call parity.
To see why put-call parity holds, consider creating the following portfolio:(a) Sell a call and buy a put with exercise price K and the same expiration date "t"(b) Buy the stock at current stock price SThe payoff from this position is riskless and always yields K at expiration (t).
To see this, assume that the stock price at expiration is S*:Since this position yields K with certainty, its value must be equal to the present value of K at the riskless rate (K e-rt).S+P-C = K e-rtC - P = S - K e-rtThis relationship can be used to value puts.
Substituting the Black-Scholes formulation for the value of an equivalent call,where

 Let us take stock of what we have established so far.
Human beings are risk averse, though they sometimes behave in quirky ways when confronted with uncertainty, and risk affects value.
The tools to assess risk have become more sophisticated, but the risks we face have also multiplied and become more complex.
What separates business success from failure, though, is the capacity to be judicious about which risks to pass through to investors, which risks to avoid and which risks to exploit.In chapter 1, we also noted that risk hedging has taken far too central a role in risk

 management.
In this chapter, we will draw a sharper distinction between risk hedging which is focused on reducing or eliminating risk and risk management where we have a far broader mission of reducing some risks, ignoring other risks and seeking out still others.
We commence our examination of risk management as a process by developing a framework for evaluating its effects on value.
We begin by assessing how risk is considered in conventional valuation and then examine three ways in which we can more completely incorporate the effects of risk on value.
In the first, we stay within a discounted cash flow framework, but examine how both risk hedging and savvy risk management can affect cash flows, growth and overall value.
In the second, we try to incorporate the effects of risk hedging and management on value through relative valuation, i.e., by looking at how the market prices companies following different risk management practices.
In the final approach, we adapt some of the techniques that we introduced in the context of real options to assess both the effects of risk hedging and risktaking on value.

 How does risk show up in conventional valuations? To answer this question, we will look at the two most commonly used approaches to valuation.
The first is intrinsic or discounted cash flow valuation, where the value of a firm or asset is estimated by discounting the expected cash flows back to the present.
The second is relative valuation, where the value of a firm is estimated by looking at how the market prices similar firms.

 In a conventional discounted cash flow valuation model, the value of an asset is the present value of the expected cash flows on the asset.
In this section, we will consider the basic structure of a discounted cash flow model, discuss how risk shows up in the model and consider the implications for risk management.Structure of DCF ModelsWhen valuing a business, discounted cash flow valuation can be applied in one of two ways.
We can discount the expected cash flow to equity investors at the cost of equity to arrive at the value of equity in the firm; this is equity valuation.

 Note that adopting the narrowest measure of the cash flow to equity investors in publicly traded firms gives us a special case of the equity valuation model – the dividend discount model.
A broader measure of free cash flow to equity is the cash flow left over after capital expenditures, working capital needs and debt payments have all been made; this is the free cash flow to equity.Alternatively, we can discount the cash flows generated for all claimholders in the firm, debt as well as equity, at the weighted average of the costs demanded by each – the cost of capital – to value the entire business.We define the cash flow to the firm as being the cash flow left over after operating expenses, taxes and reinvestment needs, but before any debt payments (interest orprincipal payments).

 Free Cash Flow to Firm (FCFF) = After-tax Operating Income – Reinvestment Needs The two differences between cash flow to equity and cash flow to the firm become clearer when we compare their definitions.
The free cash flow to equity begins with net income, which is after interest expenses and taxes, whereas the free cash flow to the firm begins with after-tax operating income, which is before interest expenses.
Another difference is that the FCFE is after net debt payments, whereas the FCFF is before net debt cash flows.
What exactly does the free cash flow to the firm measure? On the one

 hand, it measures the cash flows generated by the assets before any financing costs are considered and thus is a measure of operating cash flow.
On the other, the free cash flow to the firm is the cash flow used to service all claim holders’ needs for cash – interest and principal payments to debt holders and dividends and stock buybacks to equity investors.

 Since we cannot estimate cash flows forever, we usually simplify both equity and firm valuation models by assuming that we estimate cash flows for only a period of time and estimate a terminal value at the end of that period.
Applying this to the firm valuation model from above would yield:

 How can we estimate the terminal value? While a variety of approaches exist in practice, the approach that is most consistent with a discounted cash flow approach is based upon the assumption that cash flows will grow at a constant rate beyond year N and estimating the terminal value as follows:A similar computation can be used to estimate the terminal value of equity in an equity valuation model.Risk Adjustment in Discounted Cash flow Models

 In conventional discounted cash flow models, the effect of risk is usually isolated to the discount rate.
In equity valuation models, the cost of equity becomes the vehicle for risk adjustment, with riskier companies having higher costs of equity.
In fact, if we use the capital asset pricing model to estimate the cost of equity, the beta used carries the entire burden of risk adjustment.
In firm valuation models, there are more components that are affected by risk – the cost of debt also tends to be higher for riskier firms and these firms often cannot afford to borrow as much leading to lower debt ratios – but the bottom line is that the cost of capital is the only input in the valuation where we adjust forrisk.11 Even this adjustment becomes moot for those who fall back on the Miller Modigliani formulation where the firm value and cost of capital are unaffected by financial leverage.

 The cash flows in discounted cash flow models represent expected values, estimated either by making the most reasonable assumptions about revenues, growth and margins for the future or by estimating cash flows under a range of scenarios, attaching probabilities for each of the scenarios and taking the expected values across the scenarios.2 In summary, then, table 9.1 captures the risk adjustments in equity and firm valuation models:Table 9.1: Risk Adjustment in a DCF Model: Equity and Firm Valuation

 As we noted in chapter 5, the alternative to this approach is the certainty equivalent approach, where we discount the “certainty equivalent” cash flows at the riskfree rate to arrive at the value of a business or asset.
However, we still capture the risk effect entirely in the adjustment (downward) that we make to expected cash flows.
In fact, if we are consistent about how we define risk and measure risk premiums, the two approaches yield equivalent risk-adjusted values.The Payoff to Risk Management in a DCF World

 If the only input in a discounted cash flow model that is sensitive to risk is the discount rate and the only risk that matters when it comes to estimating discount rates is market risk (or risk that cannot be diversified away), the payoff to hedging risk in terms of higher value is likely to be very limited and the payoff to risk management will be2 There is an alternate version of DCF models, where cashflows are adjusted for risk, generating what are called certainty equivalent cashflows, and are discounted at a riskfree rate.
It is inconsistent to do both in the same valuation, since you end up double counting risk.difficult to trace.
In this section, we will consider the value effects of both hedging and managing firm specific and market risk.Risk Hedging and Value

 Firms are exposed to a myriad of firm-specific risk factors.
In fact, about 75% to 80% of the risk in a publicly traded firm comes from firm specific factors and there are some managers who do try to hedge or reduce their exposure to this risk.3 Consider the consequences of such actions on expected cash flows and discount rates in a DCF model.

 With these changes in mind, we can state two propositions about the effects of hedging firm specific risk on value.
The first is that an all equity funded firm that expends resources to reduce its exposure to firm specific risk will see its value decrease as a consequence.
This follows directly from the fact that the expected cash flows will be lower for this firm, and there is no change in the cost of equity as a consequence of the risk reduction.
Since the firm has no debt, the positive effects of risk management on the cost of debt and debt capacity are nullified.
The second is that a firm that uses debt to fund operations can see a payoff from hedging its exposure to firm specific risk in the form of a lower cost of debt, a higher debt capacity and a lower cost of capital.
The benefits will be greatest for firms that are both highly levered and are perceived as having high default risk.
This proposition follows from the earlier assertions made about cash flows and discount rates.
For firm value to increase as a consequence of prudent risk hedging, the cost of capital has to decrease by enough to overcome the costs of risk3 The R-squared of the regression of stock returns against market indices is a measure of the proportion of the risk that is market risk.
The average R-squared across all US companies is between 20 and 25%.

 hedging (which reduce the cash flows).
Since the savings take the form of a lower cost of debt and a higher debt ratio, a firm that is AAA rated and gets only 10% of its funding from debt will see little or no savings in the cost of capital as a result of the risk reduction.
In contrast, a firm with a BB rating that raises 60% of its capital from debt will benefit more from risk hedging.

 Firms can also hedge their exposure to market risk.
In particular, the expansion of the derivatives markets gives a firm that is so inclined the capacity to hedge against interest rate, inflation, foreign currency and commodity price risks.
As with the reduction of firm specific risk, a firm that reduces its exposure to market risk will see its cash flows decrease (as a result of the cost of hedging market risk) and its cost of debt decline (because of lower default risk).
In addition, though, the beta in the CAPM (or betas in a multi factor model) and the cost of equity will also decrease.
As a result, the effects of hedging market risk on firm value are more ambiguous.
If risk-hedging products are priced fairly, reducing exposure to market risk will have no effect on value.
The cost of buying protection against market risk reduces cash flows but hedging against market risk reduces the discount rate used on the cash flows.
If risk-hedging products are fairly priced in the market place, the benefits will exactly offsets the cost leading to no effect onvalue.

 For the hedging of market risk to pay off, different markets have to be pricing risk differently and one or more of them have to be wrong.
While we talk about markets as a monolith, there are four markets at play here.
The first is the equity market which assesses the value of a stock based upon the exposure of a company to market risk.
The second is the bond market that assesses the value of bonds issued by the same company based upon its evaluation of default risk.
The third is the derivatives market where we can buy options and futures on market risk components like exchange rate risk, interest rate risk and commodity price risk.
The fourth is the insurance market, where insurance companies offer protection for a price against some of the same market risks.
If all four markets price risk equivalently, there would be no payoff to risk hedging.
However, if one can buy risk protection cheaper in the insurance market than in the traded equities market, publicly traded firms will gain by buying insurance against risk.
Alternatively, ifwe can hedge against interest rate risk at a lower price in the derivatives market than in the equity market, firms will gain by using options and futures to hedge against risk.

 Considering how the reduction of firm-specific risk and market risk affect value, it is quite clear that if the view of the world embodied by discounted cash flow model is right, i.e., that investors in companies are diversified, have long time horizons and care only about market risk, managers over-manage risk.
The only firms that should be hedging risk should be ones that have substantial default risk and high cost debt or firms that have found a way to hedge market risk at a below-market prices.Risk Taking and Value

 If risk reduction generally is considered too narrowly in conventional valuation, risk taking is either not considered at all or it enters implicitly through the other inputs into a valuation model.
A firm that takes advantage of risk to get a leg up on its competition may be able to generate larger excess returns and higher growth for a longer period and thus have a higher value.
If the inputs to a valuation come from historical data, it is possible that we are incorporating the effects of risk management into value by extrapolating from the past, but the adjustment to value is not explicit.

 In particular, we would be hard pressed, with conventional discounted cash flow models, to effectively assess the effects of a change in risk management policy on value.
Firms that wonder whether they should hedge foreign currency risk or insure against terrorist attacks will get little insight from discounted cash flow models, where the only input that seems sensitive to such decisions is the discount rate.

 For better or worse, most valuations are relative valuations, where a stock is valued based upon how similar companies are priced by the market.
In practice, relative valuations take the form of a multiple and comparable firms; a firm is viewed as cheap if it trades at 10 times earnings when comparable companies trade at 15 times earnings.
While the logic of this approach seems unassailable, the problem lies in the definition of comparable firms and how analysts deal with the inevitable differences across these comparable firms.Structure of Relative ValuationThere are three basic steps in relative valuation.
The first step is picking a multiple to use for comparison.
While there are dozens of multiples that are used by analysts, they can be categorized into four groups:When deciding which multiple to use in a specific sector, analysts usually stick with conventional practice.
For example, revenue multiples are widely used for retail firms, enterprise value to EBITDA multiples for heavy infrastructure companies and price to book ratios for financial service firms.

 The second step in relative valuation is the selection of comparable firms.
A comparable firm is one with cash flows, growth potential, and risk similar to the firm being valued.
It would be ideal if we could value a firm by looking at how an exactly identical firm - in terms of risk, growth and cash flows - is priced in the market.
Since

 two firms are almost never identical in the real world, however, analysts define comparable firms to be other firms in the firm’s business or businesses.
If there are enough firms in the industry to allow for it, this list is pruned further using other criteria; for instance, only firms of similar size may be considered.

 The last step in the process is the comparison of the multiple across comparable firms.
Since it is impossible to find firms identical to the one being valued, we have to find ways of controlling for differences across firms on these variables.
In most valuations, this part of the process is qualitative.
The analyst, having compared the multiples, will tell a story about why a particular company is undervalued, relative to comparables, and why the fact that it has less risk or higher growth augments this recommendation.
In some cases, analysts may modify the multiple to take into account differences on a key variable.
For example, many analysts divide the PE ratio by the expected growth rate in earnings to come up with a PEG ratio.
Arguing that this ratio controls for differences in growth across firms, they will use it to compare companies with very different growth rates.Risk Adjustment in Relative Valuation ModelsIf risk adjustment in discounted cash flow models is too narrow and focuses too much on the discount rate, risk adjustment in relative valuation can range from being non-existent at worst to being haphazard and arbitrary at best.meet analyst estimates should trade at a premium on the sector because they are little risky.
Unless this is backed up by evidence that this is indeed true, it is an adjustment with no basis in fact.The Payoff to Risk Hedging in Relative Valuation Models

 If the assessment of risk in relative valuations is non-existent or arbitrary, it should come as no surprise that firms that try to improve their relative value will adopt risk management practices that correspond to analyst measures of risk.
If analysts consider all firms in a sector to be equally risky and the market prices stocks accordingly, there will be no payoff to reducing risk and firms will not hedge against risk.
In contrast, if earnings stability becomes the proxy measure for risk used by analysts and markets, firms will expend their resources smoothing out earnings streams by hedging against all kinds of risk.
If meeting analyst estimates of earnings becomes the proxy for risk, firms will be eager for risk management products that increase the odds that they will beat earnings estimates in the next quarter.

 The nature of risk adjustment in relative valuation therefore makes it particularly susceptible to gaming by firms.
We would argue that one of the reasons for the accounting scandals at U.S.
firms in 1999 and 2000 was that managers at risky firms created facades of stability for short sighted analysts, using both derivatives and accounting sleight of hand.

 The sanguine view that firm specific risk is diversifiable and therefore does not affect value is not shared by many managers.
Top executives at firms continue to believe that conventional valuation models take too narrow a view of risk and that they hence don’t fully factor in the consequences of significant risk exposure.
In this section, we will consider ways in which we can expand the discussion of risk in valuation.In the first part of this chapter, we noted that the adjustment for risk in conventional discounted cash flow valuation is narrowly focused on the discount rate.
Inthis section, we consider the potential effects of risk (and its management) on other inputs in the model.The Drivers of DCF Value

 The value of a firm can generally be considered a function of four key inputs.
The first is the cash flow from assets in place or investments already made, the second is the expected growth rate in the cash flows during what we can term a period of both high growth and excess returns (where the firm earns more than its cost of capital on its investments), the third is the length of time before the firm becomes a stable growth firm earning no excess returns and the final input is the discount rate reflecting both the risk of the investment.Cash flow from existing assets = After-tax Operating income generated by assets + Depreciation of existing assets – Capital maintenance expenditures– Change in non- cash working capitalNote that capital maintenance expenditures refer to the portion of capital expenditures designed to maintain the earning power of existing assets.44 Many analysts assume that capital maintenance = depreciation.
If we do that, the cashflow equation simplifies to just after-tax operating income and non-cash working capital.Expected GrowthEBIT = Reinvestment Rate * Return on Capital where,Return on Capital = EBIT (1-t) / Capital InvestedThe capital expenditures referenced here are total capital expenditures and thus include both maintenance and new capital investments.
A firm can grow its earnings faster by increasing its reinvestment rate or its return on capital or by doing both.
Higher growth, though, by itself does not guarantee a higher value since these cash flows are in the future and will be discounted back at the cost of capital.
For growth to create value, a firm has to earn a return on capital that exceeds its cost of capital.
As long as these excess returns last, growth will continue to create value.

 In summary, then, to value any firm, we begin by estimating cash flows from existing investments and then consider how long the firm will be able to earn excess returns and how high the growth rate and excess returns will be during that period.
When the excess returns fade, we estimate a terminal value and discount all of the cash flows, includingthe terminal value, back to the present to estimate the value of the firm.
Figure 9.1 summarizes the process and the inputs in a discounted cash flow model.Cash flows from existing assets Operating income (1 - tax rate) + Depreciation - Maintenance Cap Ex = Cashflow from existing assets Function of both quality of past investments and efficiency with which they are managed

 With these inputs, it is quite clear that for a firm to increase its value, it has to do one or more of the following: (a) generate more cash flows from existing assets, (b) grow faster or more efficiently during the high growth phase, (c) lengthen the high growth phase or (d) lower the cost of capital.
To the extent that risk management can help in these endeavors, it can create value.Risk and DCF Value: A Fuller Picture

 To get a more complete sense of how risk affects value, we have to look at its impact not just on the discount rate but also on the other determinants of value.
In this section, we will begin by revisiting our discussion of the relationship between discount rates and risk, and then move on to consider the effects of risk on cash flows from existing assets, growth during the excess return phase and the length of the excess return phase.
In each section, we will draw a distinction between the effects of risk hedging and risk management on value, and argue that the latter has a much wider impact on value.Discount RatesIn the first part of this chapter, we consider two ways in which risk hedging can affect discount rates.
While reducing exposure to firm specific risk has no effect on thecost of equity, reducing the exposure to market risk will reduce the cost of equity.
Reducing exposure to any risk, firm specific or market, can reduce default risk and thus the cost of debt.
In this section, we will add one more potential effect of risk hedging.Consider a firm that is a small, closely held public company or a private business.

 It is clear that the assumption that the marginal investor is well diversified and cares about only market risk falls apart in this case.
The owner of the private business and the investors in the small, public company are likely to have significant portions of their wealth invested in the company and will therefore be exposed to both market and firm specific risk.
Consequently, the cost of equity will reflect both types of risk.
At the limit, if the owner of a business has 100% of her wealth invested in it, the cost of equity will reflect not the market risk in the investment (which is the beta in the CAPM or the betas in multi-factor models) but its total risk.5 For such a firm, the reduction of firm specific risk will result in a lower cost of equity.
If we accept this rationale, the payoff to risk management should be greater for private firms and for closely held publicly traded firms than it is for publicly traded firms with dispersed stock holdings.
The cost of equity for a private business will decrease when firm-specific risk is reduced whereas the cost of equity for a publicly traded firm with diversified investors will be unaffected.
If we assume that the cost of reducing firm-specific risk is the same for both firms, the effects of reducing firm specific risk will be much more positive for private firms.
Note, though, this does not imply that value will always increase for private firms when they reduce firm specific risk.
That will still depend on whether the cost of reducing risk exceeds thebenefits (lower cost of equity and cost of capital).

 The relationship between risk management and discount rates is more complicated.
Since risk management can sometimes lead to more exposure to at least some times of risk where the firm believes that it has a competitive edge, it is possible that the costs of equity and capital will rise as a consequence.
While this, by itself, would reduce value, the key to effective risk management is that there is a more than

 5 In fact, the beta for a private firm can be written as follows: Total Beta = Market Beta/ Correlation between the firm and the market index For example, if the market beta for chemical companies is 0.80 and the correlation between chemical companies and the market is 0.40, the total beta for a private chemical company would be 2.0.compensating payoff elsewhere in the valuation in the form of higher cash flows or higher growth.Cash Flows from Existing Assets

 At the outset, it is difficult to see a payoff from risk hedging on cash flows from existing assets.
After all, the investments have already been made and the efficiency with which they are managed has nothing to do with whether the risk is hedged or not.
The only possible benefit from risk hedging is that the firm may be able to save on taxes paid for two reasons.
First, smoothing out earnings over time can lower taxes paid, especially if income at higher levels is taxed at a higher rate.
Second, the tax laws may provide benefits to hedgers by allowing them full tax deductions for hedging expenses, while not taxing the benefits received.
For instance, insurance premiums paid may be tax deductible but insurance payouts may not be taxed.
We will return to examine these potential tax benefits in the next chapter in more detail.

 If risk hedging can increase cash flows by reducing taxes paid, risk management may allow a firm to earn higher operating margins on its revenues.
A consumer product firm that is better than its competition at meeting and overcoming the risks in emerging markets may be able to exploit turmoil in these markets to generate higher market shares and profits.Expected Growth during High Growth/Excess Return PhaseThe expected growth during the high growth/ excess returns phase comes from two inputs – the reinvestment rate and the return on capital.
Both risk hedging and risk management can affect these inputs and through them the expected growth rate.

 Consider risk hedging first.
If managers accept every positive net present value investment that they are presented with, there would clearly be no benefit from hedging risk.
In practice, though, it has been widely argued that managers in some firms under invest and there is empirical evidence to support this view.
While there are many reasons given for under investment, ranging from the unwillingness of companies to issue new equity to the prevalence of capital constraints, the risk aversion of managers also plays a role.
Managers have a substantial amount of human capital invested in the companies that they manage.
Consequently, they may be much more concerned about firm specific risk

 than diversified stockholders in the firm.
After all, if the firm goes bankrupt as a result of firm-specific risk, it is only one of several dozen investments for diversified investors but it can be catastrophic for the managers in the firm.
Building on this theme, managers may avoid taking good investments – investments with returns on capital that exceed the cost of capital and positive net present value– because of the presence of firm specific risk in those investments.
An example will be a U.S.
based company that avoids taking investments in Mexico, even though the expected returns look good, because the managers are concerned about exchange rate risk.
This behavior will lower the reinvestment rate and the expected growth rate for this firm.
If we can give these managers the tools for managing and reducing the exposure to firm specific risk, we could remove the disincentive that prevents them from reinvesting.
The net result will be a higher reinvestment rate and a higher expected growth rate.

 If we tie growth to excess returns, the payoff to risk hedging should be greater for firms with weak corporate governance structures and managers with long tenure.
Managers with long tenure at firms are more likely to have substantial human capital invested in the firm and whether they are likely to get away with turning away good investments will largely be a function of how much power stockholders have to influence their decisions.
A long-term CEO with a captive board can refuse to invest in emerging markets because he views them as too risky and get away with that decision.
Without condoning his behavior, we would argue that providing protection against firm specific risks may help align the interests of stockholders and managers and lead to higher firm value.

 The effect of risk management on growth is both broader and more difficult to trace through.
A company that takes advantage of the opportunities generated by risk will be able to find more investments (higher reinvestment rate) and earn a higher return on capital on those investments.
The problem, however, is in disentangling the effects of risk management on expected growth from those of other factors such as brand name value and patent protection.Length of the High Growth/ Excess Return Period

 A firm with high growth and excess returns will clearly be worth much more if it can extend the period for which it maintains these excess returns.
Since the length of the high growth period is a function of the sustainability of competitive advantages, we have to measure the impact of risk hedging and management on this dimension.
One possible benefit to risk hedging and smoother earnings is that firms can use their stable (and positive) earnings in periods where other firms are reporting losses to full advantage.
Thus, a gold mining stock that hedges against gold price risk may be able to use its positive earnings and higher market value in periods when gold prices are down to buy out their competitors, who don’t hedge and thus report large losses at bargain basement prices.
This will be especially true in markets where access to capital is severely constrained.

 The payoff from risk management, though, should show be much greater.
Firms that are better at strategically managing their exposure to firm-specific risks may find that this by itself is a competitive advantage that increases both their excess returns and the period for which they can maintain them.
Consider, for instance, a pharmaceutical firm.
A significant portion of its value comes from new products in the pipeline (from basic research to FDA approval and commercial production) and a big part of its risk comes from the pipeline drying up.
A pharmaceutical company that manages its R&D more efficiently, generating more new products and getting them to the market quicker will have a decided advantage over another pharmaceutical firm that has allowed its research pipeline to run dry or become uneven with too many products in early research and too few close to commercial production.

 Building on this link between risk and value, the payoff to risk management should be greater for firms that are in volatile businesses with high returns on capital on investment.
For risk management to pay off as excess returns over longer periods, firms have to be in businesses where investment opportunities can be lucrative but are not predictable.
In fact, the reason the value added to managing the pipeline in the pharmaceutical business is so high is because the payoff to research is uncertain and the FDA approval process is fraught with pitfalls but the returns to a successful drug areimmense.
Table 9.2 summarizes the effects of risk hedging and risk management on the different components of value:Table 9.2: Risk Hedging, Risk Management and ValueStrategic risk management can long-term a competitive advantage and increase length of growth period.

 While discounted cash flow models allow for a great deal of flexibility when it comes to risk management, they also require information on the specific effects of risk hedging and risk management on the inputs to the models.
One way to bypass this requirement is to look at whether the market rewards companies that hedge or manage risk and, if it does, to estimate how much of a price you are willing to pay for either risk hedging and risk management.Payoff to Risk Hedging in Relative Valuation.

 A firm that hedges risk more effectively should have more stable earnings and stock prices.
If the market values these characteristics, as proponents of risk hedging argue, the market should attach a much higher value to this firm than to a competitor that does not hedge risk.
To examine whether this occurs, we could look at a group of

 comparable companies and either identify the companies that we know use risk hedging products or come up with quantifiable measures of the effects of risk hedging; two obvious choices would be earnings variability and stock price variability.
We can then compare the market values of these companies to their book value, revenues or earnings and relate the level of these multiples to the risk hedging practices of these firms.
If risk hedging pays off in higher value, firms that hedge risk and reduce earnings or price variability should trade at higher multiples than firms that do not.

 Let us consider a simple example.
In table 9.3, we have listed the price to book and enterprise value to sales ratios of gold and silver mining stocks in the United States in November 2003.
We have also reported the return on equity for each stock, and about 80% of the stocks in sample reported negative earnings in 2002.
The beta6 and standard deviation in stock prices7 are used as measures of the market risk and total risk respectively in these companies.
In the final column, the compounded annual return investors would have earned on each of these stocks between November 1998 and November 2003 is reported.Table 9.3: Gold Mining Companies Valuation Multiples and Risk6 The betas are estimated using 5 years of weekly returns against the S&P 500.
7 The standard deviations are annualized estimates based upon 5 years of weekly returns on the stock.

 There are three interesting findings that emerge from this table.
The first is that even a casual perusal indicates that there are a large number of companies with negative betas, not surprising since gold prices and the equity markets moved in opposite directions for much of the period (1998-2003).
At the same time, there are companies with not just positive betas but fairly large positive betas, indicating that these companies hedged at least some of the gold price risk over the period.
Finally, there is no easily detectable link between betas and standard deviations in stock prices.
There are companies with negative betas and high standard deviations as well as companies with positive betas and low standard deviations.To examine whether the pricing of these companies is affected by their exposure to market and total risk, we estimated the correlations between the multiples (price to book and EV/sales) and the risk variables.
The correlation matrix is reported in table 9.4:Table 9.4: Correlation Matrix: Value versus Risk: Gold Mining: November 2003Earnings stability 5-year return ** Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed).
* Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed).

 Only two of the correlations are statistically significant.
First, companies with higher betas tended to have lower standard deviations; these are the companies that hedged away gold price risk, pushing their betas from negative to positive territory and became less risky on a total risk basis (standard deviation).
Second, companies with high enterprise value to sales ratios had much higher returns over the last 5 years, which perhaps explains why they trade at lofty multiples.
It is the absence of correlation that is more telling about the payoff or lack thereof to risk management in this sector.
Both the price to book and enterprise value to sales ratios are negatively correlated with beta and positively correlated with standard deviation in stock prices, though the correlations are not statistically significant.
In other words, the companies that hedged risk and lowered their stock price volatility did not trade at higher multiples.
In fact, these firms may have been punished by the market for their risk hedging activities.
There was also no correlation between the stability of earnings8 and the valuation multiples.
There is also no evidence to indicate that the hedging away of gold price risk had any effect on overall stockreturns.

 Does this mean that risk hedging does not pay off? We are not willing to make that claim, based upon this sample.
After all, gold mining stocks are a small and fairly unique subset of the market.
It is possible that risk hedging pays off in some sectors but the question has to be answered by looking at how the market prices stocks in these sectors and what risk measure it responds to.
The onus has to be on those who believe that risk hedging is value enhancing to show that the market sees it as such.
We will return to this issue in far more depth in the next chapter.Payoff to Risk Management in Relative ValuationIf the market does not attach much value to risk hedging, does it value risk management? As with the risk hedging case, we can begin with a group of comparablefirms and try to come up with a quantifiable measure of risk management.
We can then relate how the market values stocks to this quantifiable measure.

 We will face bigger challenges establishing a link (or lack thereof) between risk management and value than we do with risk hedging.
Unlike risk hedging, where the variability in earnings and value can operate as a proxy for the amount of hedging, it is difficult to come up with good proxies for the quality of risk management.
Furthermore, these proxies are likely to be industry specific.
For instance, the proxy for risk management in the pharmaceutical firm may be the size and balance in the product pipeline.
In the oil business, it may a measure of the speed with which the firm can ramp up its production of oil if oil prices go up.

 There is a third way of looking at the value of both risk hedging and risk management and that is to use option-pricing models.
As we will argue in this section, risk hedging is essentially the equivalent of buying a put option against specific eventualities whereas risk management gives the firm the equivalent of a call option.
In fact, much of our discussion of real options in chapter 8 can be considered an examination of the value of strategic risk taking.An Option Pricing View of Risk Hedging

 Consider a firm with a value of $100 million and assume that it buys risk-hedging products to ensure that its value does not drop below $ 80 million.
In effect, it is buying a put option, where the underlying asset is the unhedged value of the firm’s assets and the strike price is the lower bound on the value.
The payoff diagram for risk hedging as a put option is shown in figure 9.2:8 The variance in quarterly earnings over the previous 5 years was used to measure earnings stability.+ Value of put (risk hedging)

 To provide a measure of the value of risk hedging, consider again the example of the firm with a value of $ 100 million that wants to hedge against the possibility that it’s value may drop below $ 80 million.
Assume that the standard deviation in firm value9 is 30% and that the one-year riskless rate is 4%.
If we value a one-year put option with these characteristics, using a standard Black-Scholes model, we arrive at a value of $2.75 or 2.75% of firm value.
That would indicate that this firm can spend up to 2.75% of its value to hedge against the likelihood that value will drop below $ 80 million.
The value of risk hedging can be estimated as a function of both the degree of protection demanded (as a9 The standard deviation in firm value will generally be much lower than the standard deviation in stock prices (equity value) for any firm with substantial leverage.
In fact, the standard deviation in firm value can be written as:O° Firm vawe = (E (D+ E))? 0? gquity + (DI(D + E))’ 0’ dem + 2((E (D + E))(DI(D + E))o Equit yO Debtpercent of existing firm value) and the standard deviation in firm value.
Table 9.5 provides these estimates:Table 9.5: Value of Risk Hedging as a percent of Firm ValueThe value of hedging risk increases as the volatility in firm value increases and with the degree of protection against downside risk.
The cost of hedging risk can be compared to these values to assess whether it makes sense to hedge risk in the first place.

 This process can be extended to cover risk hedging that is focused on earnings, but the problem that we run into is one that we referenced in the earlier section on discounted cash flow valuation.
Without a model to link earnings to value, we cannot value risk hedging as a put against value declining.
Simplistic models such as assuming a constant PE ratio as earnings go up and down can lead to misleading conclusions about the value of hedging.

 Looking at the trade off between the cost and value of risk hedging yields the proposition that risk hedging is most likely to generate value when investors cannot find traded instruments in the market that protect against the risk.
This proposition emerges from our belief that if investors can find securities in the market that protect against risk, it is unlikely (though not impossible) that companies could buy risk protection for less.
Since it is easier for investors to buy protection against certain types of risk such as currency, interest rate and commodity risk than against others such as political risk, this would indicate that risk hedging is likely to have a much larger payoff when employed to reduce exposure to the latter.An Option Pricing View of Risk ManagementIf risk hedging creates the equivalent of a put option for the firm, risk management creates the equivalent of a call option.
This is because risk management is

 centered on taking advantage of the upside created because of uncertainty.
Consider a simple example.
Assume that you operate an oil company and that you are considering whether to invest in new refineries and facilities designed to help you increase your oil production quickly to take advantage of higher oil prices.
You are looking at a call option, whose value will be tied to both the variance in oil prices and the amount of additional production (and cash flows) you will generate if oil prices increase.

 In fact, while much of the real option literature has been focused on valuation issues and applying option pricing models to valuing real options such as patents or oil reserves, real options also offer an effective framework for examining the costs and benefits of risk management.
Using the option framework would lead us to argue that risk management is likely to generate the most value for firms that operate in volatile businesses with substantial barriers to entry.
The first part of the proposition – higher volatility – follows from viewing risk management as a call option, since options increase in value with volatility.
Significant barriers to entry allow firms that take advantage of upside risk to earn substantial excess returns for longer periods.

 There are two extreme views that dominate the risk management debate and they are both rooted in risk hedging.
One perspective, adopted by portfolio theorists and believers in efficient markets, is that risk hedging on the part of firms is almost always useless and will generally decrease value.
While proponents of this view will concede that there are potential tax benefits (though they are likely to be small) and possibly a savings in distress cost, they will argue that diversified investors can manage risk exposure in their portfolios much more effectively and with lower costs than managers in the individual firms.
At the other extreme are those who sell risk hedging products and essentially argue that reducing risk will reduce earnings and price variability and almost always yield a payoff to firms in the form of higher stock prices.
Neither side seems to make a meaningful distinction between risk hedging and risk management.

 Based upon our discussion in this chapter, we think that there is an intermediate view that makes more sense.
Risk hedging is most likely to generate value for smaller, closely held firms or for firms with substantial debt and distress costs.
It is also most likely to create value if it is focused on hedging risks where investors cannot buy risk protection through market-traded securities.
The increase in value is most likely to come from a lower cost of capital though there may be a secondary benefit in managers being more willing to invest in high risk, high return projects (higher growth).
Risk hedging is unlikely to create value for firms that are widely held by diversified investors and if it is focused on risk that where market protection is easy to obtain.
Table 9.6 summarizes ourconclusions:Using this matrix, it is clear that risk hedging should be used sparingly by firms that are widely held by institutional investors, are not highly levered and are exposed to market risks where investors can buy risk protection easily.

 All firms are exposed to risk and should therefore consider risk management as an integral part of doing business.
Effective risk management is more about strategic than financial choices and will show up in value as higher and more sustainable excess returns.
The benefits of risk management, though, are likely to be greatest in businesses with the following characteristics:

 Given that risk management can have such high payoffs, how can we explain the lack of emphasis on it? There are several reasons.
The first is that its emphasis on strategic rather than financial considerations pushes it into the realm of corporate strategy.
The second is that it is far more difficult to trace the payoff from risk management than it is with risk hedging.
Those who sell risk-hedging products can point to the benefits of less volatile earnings and even less downside risk in value, but those pushing for risk management have to talk in terms of excess returns in the future.We have made much of the difference between risk hedging and risk management in this paper and the consequences for value.
In table 9.7, we summarize the discussion in this paper:Table 9.7: Risk Management versus Risk Hedging – A SummaryGiven the discussion of risk hedging and risk management in this paper, we see five steps that every firm should take to deal with risk effectively.

 Step 1: Make an inventory of possible risks: The process has to begin with an inventory of all of the potential risks that a firm is exposed to.
This will include risk that are specific to the firm, risks that affect the entire sector and macroeconomic risks that have an influence on the value.

 Step 2: Decide whether to hedge or not to hedge: We have argued through this paper that risk hedging is not always optimal and will reduce value in many cases.
Having made an inventory of risks, the firm has to decide which risks it will attempt to hedge and which ones it will allow to flow through to its investors.
The size of the firm, the type of stockholders that it has and its financial leverage (exposure to distress) will all play a role in making this decision.
In addition, the firm has to consider whether investors can buy protection against the risks in the market on their own.

 Step 3: Choose risk hedging products: If a firm decides to hedge risk, it has a number of choices.
Some of these choices are market traded (currency and interest rate derivatives, for example), some are customized solutions (prepared by investment banks to hedge against risk that may be unique to the firm) and some are insurance products.
The firm has to consider both the effectiveness of each of the choices and the costs.

 Step 4: Determine the risk or risks that you understand better or deal with better than your competitors: This is the step where the firm moves from risk hedging to risk management and from viewing risk as a threat to risk as a potential opportunity.
Why would one firm be better at dealing with certain kinds of risk than its competitors? It may have to do with past experience.
A firm that has operated in emerging markets for decades clearly will have a much better sense of both what to expect in a market meltdown but also how to deal with it.
It may also come from the control of a resource – physical or human – that provides the company an advantage when exposed to the risk.
Having access to low cost oil reserves may give an oil company an advantage in the event of a drop in oil prices and having a top notch legal staff may give a tobacco company acompetitive advantage when it comes to litigation risk.

 Step 5: Devise strategies to take advantage of your differential advantage in the long term.
In the final step in the process, firms build on their competitive edge and lay out what they will do to create the maximum benefit.
The oil company with low cost reserves may decide that it will use its cost advantage the next time oil prices drop to acquire oil companies with higher cost reserves and high leverage.Risk hedging and risk management are not mutually exclusive strategies.
In fact,

 we consider risk hedging to be part of broader risk management strategy where protecting against certain types of risk and trying to exploit others go hand in hand.
We would argue that most firms do not have comprehensive strategies when it comes to dealing with risk.
Consider how each step in this process is handled currently and the entity it is handled by.
The risk inventory, if it is done, is usually the responsibility of the managers of a company.
These managers often bring in a narrow perspective of risk, based upon their own experiences, and tend to miss some important risks and over weight others.
The advice on what type of risks to hedge (step 2) is usually offered by the same entities (investment banks and insurance companies) that then offer their own risk hedging products (step 3) as the ideal solutions.
As a result of the conflict of interests, too much risk gets hedged at many large firms and too little at smaller firms, and the risk hedging products chosen are almost never the optimal ones.
The last two steps are usually viewed as the domain of strategists in the firm and the consultants that work with them.
The limitation with this set-up, though, is that strategic advice tends to gloss over risk and focus on rewards.
Consequently, strategies that focus on higher profitability and higher growth often dominate strategies built around taking advantage of risk.
Table 9.8 summarizes the five steps, the state of play at the moment and potential opportunities forcomplete risk management advice.

 There is too much of a focus on risk hedging and not enough attention paid to risk management at firms.
This is troubling since the payoff to risk hedging is likely to be small even for firms where it makes sense and is often negative at many large publicly traded firms with diversified investors.
In contrast, the payoff to risk management can be substantial to a far larger subset of firms.

 In this chapter, we have laid out the fundamental differences between risk hedging and risk management and set up a template for the comprehensive management of risk.
The real work, though, will have to occur at the level of each firm since the right path to adopt will depend upon the firm’s competitive advantages and the sector it operates in.
Unlike risk hedging, which is viewed as the job of the CFO, risk management should be on the agenda of everyone in the firm.
In today’s world, the key to success lies not in avoiding risk but in taking advantage of the opportunities offered by risk.
As businesses confront the reality of higher volatility, they have to get out of a defensive crouch when it comes to risk and think of ways in which they can exploit the risk to advantage in a global market place.

 To manage risk, you first have to understand the risks that you are exposed to.
This process of developing a risk profile thus requires an examination of both the immediate risks from competition and product market changes as well as the more indirect effects of macro economic forces.
We will begin this chapter by looking at ways in which we can develop a complete risk profile for a firm, where we outline all of the risks that a firm is exposed to and estimate the magnitude of the exposure.

 In the second part of the chapter, we turn to a key question of what we should do about these risks.
In general, we have three choices.
We can do nothing and let the risk pass through to investors in the business – stockholders in a publicly traded firm and the owners of private businesses.
We can try to protect ourselves against the risk using a variety of approaches – using options and futures to hedge against specific risks, modifying the way we fund assets to reduce risk exposure or buying insurance.
Finally, we can intentionally increase our exposure to some of the risks because we feel that we have significant advantages over the competition.
In this chapter, we will consider the first two choices and hold off on the third choice until the next chapter.

 Every business faces risks and the first step in managing risk is making an inventory of the risks that you face and getting a measure of the exposure to each risk.
In this section, we examine the process of developing a risk profile for a business and consider some of the potential pitfalls.
There are four steps involved in this process.
In the first step, we list all risks that a firm is exposed to, from all sources and without consideration to the type of risk.
We categorize these risks into broad groups in the second step and analyze the exposure to each risk in the third step.
In the fourth step, we examine the alternatives available to manage each type of risk and the expertise that the firm brings to dealing with the risk.Assume that you run a small company in the United States, packaging and selling

 premium coffee beans for sale to customers.
You may buy your coffee beans in Columbia, sort and package them in the California and ship them to your customers all over the world.
In the process, you are approached to a multitude of risks.
There is the risk of political turmoil in Columbia, compounded by the volatility in the dollar-peso exchange rate.
Your packaging plant in California may sit on top of an earthquake fault line and be staffed with unionized employees, exposing you to the potential for both natural disasters and labor troubles.
Your competition comes from other small businesses offering their own gourmet coffee beans and from larger companies like Starbucks that may be able to get better deals because of higher volume.
On top of all of this, you have to worry about the overall demand for coffee ebbing and flowing, as customers choose between a wider array of drinks and worry about the health concerns of too much caffeine consumption.

 Not surprisingly, the risks you face become more numerous and complicated as you expand your business to include new products and markets, and listing them all can be exhausting.
At the same time, though, you have to be aware of the risks you face before you can begin analyzing them and deciding what to do about them.

 A listing of all risks that a firm faces can be overwhelming.
One step towards making them manageable is to sort risk into broad categories.
In addition to organizing risks into groups, it is a key step towards determining what to do about these risks.
In general, risk can be categorized based on the following criteria:will have a large impact on a small software company with the same exposure.
Some risks may not be easily categorized and the same risk can switch categories over time, but it still pays to do the categorization.

 A logical follow up to categorizing risk is to measure exposure to risk.
To make this measurement, though, we have to first decide what it is that risk affects.
At its simplest level, we could measure the effect of risk on the earnings of a company.
At its broadest level, we can capture the risk exposure by examining how the value of a firm changes as a consequence.Earnings versus Value Risk ExposureIt is easier to measure earnings risk exposure than value risk exposure.
There are numerous accounting rules governing how companies should record and report exchange rate and interest rate movements.
Consider, for instance, how we deal with exchange rate

 movements.
From an accounting standpoint, the risk of changing exchange rates is captured in what is called translation exposure, which is the effect of these changes on the current income statement and the balance sheet.
In making translations of foreign operations from the foreign to the domestic currency, there are two issues we need to address.
The first is whether financial statement items in a foreign currency should be translated at the current exchange rate or at the rate that prevailed at the time of the transaction.
The second is whether the profit or loss created when the exchange rate adjustment is made should be treated as a profit or loss in the current period or deferred until a future period.

 Accounting standards in the United States apply different rules for translation depending upon whether the foreign entity is a self-contained unit or a direct extension of the parent company.
For the first group, FASB 52 requires that an entity’s assets and liabilities be converted into the parent’s currency at the prevailing exchange rate.
The increase or decrease in equity that occurs as a consequence of this translation is captured as an unrealized foreign exchange gain or loss and will not affect the income statement until the underlying assets and liabilities are sold or liquidated.
For the second group, only the monetary assets and liabilities1 have to be converted, based upon the prevailing exchange rate, and the net income is adjusted for unrealized translations gains or losses.

 Translation exposure matters from the narrow standpoint of reported earnings and balance sheet values.
The more important question, however, is whether investors view these translation changes as important in determining firm value, or whether they view them as risk that will average out across companies and across time, and the answers to this question are mixed.
In fact, several studies suggest that earnings changes caused by exchange rate changes do not affect the stock prices of firms.

 While translation exposure is focused on the effects of exchange rate changes on financial statements, economic exposure attempts to look more deeply at the effects of such changes on firm value.
These changes, in turn, can be broken down into two types.
Transactions exposure looks at the effects of exchange rate changes on transactions and projects that have already been entered into and denominated in a foreign currency.1 Monetary assets include cash, marketable securities and some short terms assets such as inventory.
They do not include real assets.Operating exposure measures the effects of exchange rate changes on expected future cash flows and discount rates, and, thus, on total value.

 In his book on international finance, Shapiro presents a time pattern for economic exposure, in which he notes that firms are exposed to exchange rate changes at every stage in the process from developing new products for sale abroad, to entering into contracts to sell these products to waiting for payment on these products.2 To illustrate, a weakening of the U.S.
dollar will increase the competition among firms that depend upon export markets, such as Boeing, and increase their expected growth rates and value, while hurting those firms that need imports as inputs to their production process.Measuring Risk Exposure

 We can measure risk exposure in subjective terms by assessing whether the impact of a given risk will be large or small (but not specifying how large or small) or in quantitative terms where we attempt to provide a numerical measure of the possible effect.
In this section, we will consider both approaches.Qualitative approaches

 When risk assessment is done for strategic analysis, the impact is usually measured in qualitative terms.
Thus, a firm will be found to be vulnerable to country risk or exchange rate movements, but the potential impact will be categorized on a subjective scale.
Some of these scales are simple and have only two or three levels (high, average and low impact) whereas others allow for more gradations (risk can be scaled on a 1-10scale).

 No matter how these scales are structured, we will be called upon to make judgments about where individual risks fall on this scale.
If the risk being assessed is one that the firm is exposed to on a regular basis, say currency movements, we can look at its impact on earnings or market value on a historical basis.
If the risk being assessed is a low-probability event on which there is little history as is the case for an airline exposed to the risk of terrorism, the assessment has to be based upon the potential impact of such an incident.2 Shapiro, A., 1996, Multinational Financial Management (Seventh Edition), John Wiley, New York.

 While qualitative scales are useful, the subjective judgments that go into them can create problems since two analysts looking at the same risk can make very different assessments of their potential impact.
In addition, the fact that the risk assessment is made by individuals, based upon their judgments, exposes it to all of the quirks in risk assessment that we noted earlier in the book.
For instance, individuals tend to weight recent history too much in making assessments, leading to an over estimation of exposure from recently manifested risks.
Thus, companies over estimate the likelihood and impact of terrorist attacks right after well publicized attacks elsewhere.Quantitative approaches

 If risk manifests itself over time as changes in earnings and value, you can assess a firm’s exposure to risk by looking at its past history.
In particular, changes in a firm’s earnings and value can be correlated with potential risk sources to see both whether they are affected by the risks and by how much.
Alternatively, you can arrive at estimates of risk exposure by looking at firms in the sector in which you operate and their sensitivity to changes in risk measures.1.
Firm specific risk measures

 Risk matters to firms because it affects their profitability and consequently their value.
Thus, the simplest way of measuring risk exposure is to look at the past and examine how earnings and firm value have moved over time as a function of pre- specified risk.
If we contend, for instance, that a firm is cyclical and is exposed to the risk of economic downturns, we should be able to back this contention up with evidence that it has been adversely impacted by past recessions.

 Consider a simple example where we estimate how much risk Walt Disney Inc.
is exposed to from to changes in a number of macro-economic variables, using two measures: Disney’s firm value (the market value of debt and equity) and its operating income.
We begin by collecting past data on firm value, operating income and the macroeconomic variables against which we want to measure its sensitivity.
In the case of the Disney, we look at four macro-economic variables – the level of long term rates measured by the 10 year treasury bond rate, the growth in the economy measured by changes in real GDP, the inflation rate captured by the consumer price index and thestrength of the dollar against other currencies (estimated using the trade-weighted dollar value).
In table 10.1, we report the earnings and value for Disney at the end of each year from 1988 to 2003 with the levels of each macro-economic variable.Table 10.1: Disney’s Firm Value and Macroeconomic VariablesOnce these data have been collected, we can then estimate the sensitivity of firm value to changes in the macroeconomic variables by regressing changes in firm value each year against changes in each of the individual variables.yields the following result (with t statistics in brackets):Change in Firm Value = 0.2081 - 4.16 (Change in Interest Rates)3 To ensure that the coefficient on this regression is a measure of duration, we compute the change in the interest rate as follows: (rt – rt-1)/(1+rt-1).
Thus, if the long term bond rate goes from 8% to 9%, we compute the change to be (.09-.08)/1.08.Every 1% increase in long term rates translates into a loss in value of 4.16%, though the statistical significant is marginal.Disney’s value as a firm has not been affected significantly by economic growth.
Again, to the extent that we trust the coefficients from this regression, this would suggest that Disney is not a cyclical firm.result:Disney‘s firm value is unaffected by changes in inflation since the coefficient on inflation is not statistically different from zero.Change in Firm Value = 0.2060 -2.04 (Change in Dollar)Statistically, this yields the strongest relationship.
Disney’s firm value decreases as the dollar strengthens.

 In some cases, it is more reasonable to estimate the sensitivity of operating cash flows directly against changes in interest rates, inflation, and other variables.
For Disney, we repeated the analysis using operating income as the dependent variable, rather than firm value.
Since the procedure for the analysis is similar, we summarize the conclusions below:Disney’s operating income, unlike its firm value, has moved with interest rates.
Again, this result has to be considered in light of the low t statistics on the coefficients.
In general, regressing operating income against interest rate changes should yield a lower estimate of duration than the firm value measure, for two reasons.
One is that income tends to be smoothed out relative to value, and the other is that the current operating income does not reflect the effects of changes in interest rates on discount rates and future growth.Change in Operating Income = 0.1725 + 0.66 (GDP Growth)Disney’s operating income, like its firm value, does not reflect any sensitivity to overall economic growth, confirming the conclusion that Disney is not a cyclical firm.Change in Operating Income = 0.1768 -1.76 ( Change in Dollar)Disney’s operating income, like its firm value, is negatively affected by a stronger dollar.Unlike firm value which is unaffected by changes in inflation, Disney’s operating income moves strongly with inflation, rising as inflation increases.
This wouldsuggest that Disney has substantial pricing power, allowing it to pass through inflation increases into its prices and operating income..

 The question of what to do when operating income and firm value have different results can be resolved fairly simply.
The former provides a measure of earnings risk exposure and is thus narrow, whereas the latter captures the effect not only on current earnings but also on future earnings.
It is possible, therefore, that a firm is exposed to earnings risk from a source but that the value risk is muted, as is the alternative where the risk to current earnings is low but the value risk is high.2.
Sector-wide or Bottom up Risk Measures

 There are two key limitations associated with the firm-specific risk measures described in the last section.
First, they make sense only if the firm has been in its current business for a long time and expects to remain in it for the foreseeable future.
In today’s environment, in which firms find their business mixes changing from period to period as they divest some businesses and acquire new ones, it is unwise to base too many conclusions on a historical analysis.
Second, the small sample sizes used tend to yield regression estimates that are not statistically significant (as is the case with the coefficient estimates that we obtained for Disney from the interest rate regression).
In such cases, we might want to look at the characteristics of the industry in which a firm plans to expand, rather than using past earnings or firm value as a basis for the analysis.To illustrate, we looked at the sector estimates4 for each of the sensitivity measures for the four businesses that Disney is in: movies, entertainment, theme park and consumer product businesses.
Table 10.2 summarizes the findings:Table 10.2: Sector Sensitivity to Macroeconomic Risks4 These sector estimates were obtained by aggregating the firm values of all firms in a sector on a quarter- by-quarter basis going back 12 years, and then regressing changes in this aggregate firm value against changes in the macro-economic variable each quarter.estimates and can be relied on more.

 Once you have categorized and measured risk exposure, the last step in the process requires us to consider the choices we can make in dealing with each type of risk.
While we will defer the full discussion of which risks should be hedged and which should not to the next section, we will prepare for that discussion by first outlining what our alternatives are when it comes to dealing with each type of risk and follow up be evaluating our expertise in dealing with that risk.

 There are a whole range of choices when it comes to hedging risk.
You can try to reduce or eliminate risk through your investment and financing choices, through insurance or by using derivatives.
Not all choices are feasible or economical with all risks and it is worthwhile making an inventory of the available choices with each one.
The risk associated with nationalization cannot be managed using derivatives and can be only partially insured against; the insurance may cover the cost of the fixed assets appropriated but not against the lost earnings from these assets.
In contrast, exchange rate risk can be hedged in most markets with relative ease using market-traded derivatives contracts.

 A tougher call involves making an assessment of how well you deal with different risk exposures.
A hotel company may very well decide that its expertise is not in making real estate judgments but in running hotels efficiently.
Consequently, it may decide to hedge against the former while being exposed to the latter.

 Assume now that you have a list of all of the risks that you are exposed to, categorizes these risks and measured your exposure to each one.
A fundamental and key question that you have to answer is which of these risks you want to hedge against and which you want to either pass through to your investors or exploit.
To make thus judgment, you have to consider the potential costs and benefits of hedging; in effect, you hedge those risks where the benefits of hedging exceed the costs.

 Protecting yourself against risk is not costless.
Sometimes, as is the case of buying insurance, the costs are explicit.
At other times, as with forwards and futures contracts, the costs are implicit.
In this section, we consider the magnitude of explicit and implicit costs of hedging against risk and how these costs may weigh on the final question of whether to hedge in the first place.

 Most businesses insure against at least some risk and the costs of risk protection are easy to compute.
They take the form of the insurance premiums that you have to pay to get the protection.
In general, the trade off is simple.
The more complete the protection against risk, the greater the cost of the insurance.
In addition, the cost of insurance will increase with the likelihood and the expected impact of a specified risk.
A business located in coastal Florida will have to pay more to insure against floods and hurricanes than one in the mid-west.

 Businesses that hedge against risks using options can also measure their hedging costs explicitly.
A farmer who buys put options to put a lower bound on the price that he will sell his produce at has to pay for the options.
Similarly, an airline that buys call options on fuel to make sure that the price paid does not exceed the strike price will know the cost of buying this protection.Implicit CostsThe hedging costs become less explicit as we look at other ways of hedging against risk.
Firms that try to hedge against risk through their financing choices – using

 peso debt to fund peso assets, for instance – may be able to reduce their default risk (and consequently their cost of borrowing) but the savings are implicit.
Firms that use futures and forward contracts also face implicit costs.
A farmer that buys futures contracts to lock in a price for his produce may face no immediate costs (in contrast with the costs of buying put options) but will have to give up potential profits if prices move upwards.

 The way in which accountants deal with explicit as opposed to implicit costs can make a difference in which hedging tool gets chosen.
Explicit costs reduce the earnings in the period in which the protection is acquired, whereas the implicit costs manifest themselves only indirectly in future earnings.
Thus, a firm that buys insurance against risk will report lower earnings in the period that the insurance is bought whereas a firm that uses futures and forward contracts to hedge will not take an earnings hit in that period.
The effects of the hedging tool used will manifest itself in subsequent periods with the latter reducing profitability in the event of upside risk.

 There are several reasons why firms may choose to hedge risks, and they can be broadly categorized into five groups.
First, as we noted in the last chapter, the tax laws may benefit those who hedge risk.
Second, hedging against catastrophic or extreme risk may reduce the likelihood and the costs of distress, especially for smaller businesses.
Third, hedging against risks may reduce the under investment problem prevalent in many firms as a result of risk averse managers and restricted capital markets.
Fourth, minimizing the exposure to some types of risk may provide firms with more freedom to fine tune their capital structure.
Finally, investors may find the financial statements of firms that do hedge against extraneous or unrelated risks to be more informative than firms that do not.a.
Tax Benefits

 A firm that hedges against risk may receive tax benefits for doing so, relative to an otherwise similar firm that does not hedge against risk.
As we noted in chapter 9, there are two sources for these tax benefits.
One flows from the smoothing of earnings that is a consequence of effective risk hedging; with risk hedging, earnings will be lower than

 they would have been without hedging, during periods where the risk does not manifest itself and higher in periods where there is risk exposure.
To the extent that the income at higher levels gets taxed at higher rates, there will be tax savings over time to a firm with more level earnings.
To see why, consider a tax schedule, where income beyond a particular level (say $ 1 billion) is taxed at a higher rate – i.e., a windfall profit tax.
Since risk management can be used to smooth out income over time, it is possible for a firm with volatile income to pay less in taxes over time as a result of risk hedging.
Table 10.3 illustrates the tax paid by the firm, assuming at tax rate of 30% for income below $ 1 billion and 50% above $ 1 billion:Table 10.3: Taxes Paid: With and Without Risk Management

 Risk hedging has reduced the taxes paid over 4 years by $140 million.
While it is true that we have not reflected the cost of risk hedging in the taxable income, the firm can afford to spend up to $ 140 million and still come out with a value increase.
The tax benefits in the example above were predicated on the existence of a tax rate that rises with income (convex tax rates).
Even in its absence, though, firms that go from making big losses in some years to big profits in other years can benefit from risk hedging to the extent that they get their tax benefits earlier.
In a 1999 study, Graham and Smith provide some empirical evidence on the potential tax benefits to companies from hedging by looking at the tax structures of U.S.
firms.
They estimate that about half of all U.S.
firms face convex effective tax functions (where tax rates risk with income), about a quarter have linear tax functions (where tax rates do not change with income) and a quarter actually have concave tax functions (where tax rates decrease with income).
They also note that firms with volatile income near a kink in the statutory tax schedule, and firms

 that shift from profits in one period to losses in another, are most likely to have convex tax functions.
Using simulations of earnings, they estimate the potential tax savings to firms and conclude that while they are fairly small for most firms, they can generate tax savings that are substantial for a quarter of the firms with convex tax rates.
In some cases, the savings amounted to more than 40% of the overall tax liability.5

 The other potential tax benefit arises from the tax treatment of hedging expenses and benefits.
At the risk of over simplification, there will be a tax benefit to hedging if the cost of hedging is fully tax deductible but the benefits from insurance are not fully taxed.
As a simple example, consider a firm that pays $2.5 million in insurance premiums each year for three years and receives an expected benefit of $7.5 million at the third year.
Assume that the insurance premiums are tax deductible but that the insurance payout is not taxed.
In such a scenario, the firm will clearly gain from hedging.
Mains (1983) uses a variation of this argument to justify the purchase of insurance by companies.
He cites an Oil Insurance Association brochure entitled “To Insure or Not to Insure” that argues that self-insure property damages are deductible only to the extent of the book value but that income from insurance claims is tax free as long as it is used to repair or replace the destroyed assets.
Even if used elsewhere, firms only have to pay the capital gains tax (which is lower than the income tax) on the difference between the book value of the asset and the insurance settlement.
Since the capital gains tax rate is generally lower than the income tax rate, firms can reduce their tax payments by buying even fairly-priced insurance.6b.
Better investment decisions

 In a perfect world, the managers of a firm would consider each investment opportunity based upon its expected cash flows and the risk that that investment adds to the investors in the firm.
They will not be swayed by risks that can be diversified away by these investors, substantial though these risks may be, and capital markets will stand ready to supply the funds needed to make these investments.5 Graham, J.R., and C.W.
Smith, 1999, Tax Incentives to Hedge, Journal of Finance, v54, 2242-2262.
6 Mains, B., 1983, Corporate Insurance Purchases and Taxes, Journal of Risk and Insurance, v50, 197-223.As we noted in chapter 9, there are frictions that can cause this process to break down.
In particular, there are two problems that affect investment decisions that can be traced to the difference between managerial and stockholder interests:b.
Capital market frictions: A firm that has a good investment that it does not have cashand can stick with long-term capital investment plans and increase value.8By allowing managers to hedge firm-specific risks, risk hedging may reduce the number of good investments that get rejected either because of managerial risk aversion or lack of access to capital.

 7 Jensen, M.C.
and Meckling, W.H.
1976.
Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership Structure, Journal of Financial Economics, 3 (3): 305-360.
8 Froot, K.A., Scharfstein, D.S.
and Stein, J.C.
1993.
Risk Management: Coordinating Corporate Investment and Financing Policies.
Journal of Finance 48(5): 1629-1658; Froot, K, D Schartstein and J Stein, 1994,A Framework for Risk Management, Harvard Business Review, v72, 59 71c.
Distress Costs

 Every business, no matter how large and healthy, faces the possibility of distress under sufficiently adverse circumstances.
While bankruptcy can be the final cost of distress, the intermediate costs of being perceived to be in trouble are substantial as well.
Customers may be reluctant to buy your products, suppliers will impose stricter terms and employees are likely to look for alternative employment, creating a death spiral from which it is difficult to recover.
These “indirect” costs of distress can be very large, and studies that try to measure it estimate they range from 20% to 40% of firm value.9

 Given the large costs of bankruptcy, it is prudent for firms to protect themselves against risks that may cause distress by hedging against them.
In general, these will be risks that are large relative to the size of the firm and its fixed commitments (such as interest expenses).
As an example, while large firms with little debt like Coca Cola can easily absorb the costs of exchange rate movements, smaller firms and firms with larger debt obligations may very well be pushed to their financial limits by the same risk.
Consequently, it makes sense for the latter to hedge against risk.10

 The payoff from lower distress costs show up in value in one of two ways.
In a conventional discounted cash flow valuation, the effect is likely to manifest itself as a lower cost of capital (through a lower cost of debt) and a higher value.
In the adjusted present value approach, the expected bankruptcy costs will be reduced as a consequence of the hedging.
To the extent that the increase in value from reducing distress costs exceeds the cost of hedging, the value of the firm will increase.
Note that the savings in distress costs from hedging are likely to manifest themselves in substantial ways only when distress costs are large.
Consequently, we would expect firms that have borrowed money and are exposed to significant operating risk to be better candidates for risk

 9 Shapiro, A.
and S.
Titman, 1985, An Integrated Approach to Corporate Risk Management, Midland Corporate Finance Journal, v3, 41-55.
For an examination of the theory behind indirect bankruptcy costs, see Opler, T.
and S.
Titman, 1994, Financial Distress and Corporate Performance.
Journal of Finance 49, 1015-1040.
For an estimate on how large these indirect bankruptcy costs are in the real world, see Andrade, G.
and S.
Kaplan, 1998, How Costly is Financial (not Economic) Distress? Evidence from Highly Leveraged Transactions that Become Distressed.
Journal of Finance.
53, 1443-1493.
They look at highly levered transactions that subsequently became distressed snd conclude that the magnitude of these costs ranges from 10% to 23% of firm value.
10 Smith, C.W.
and Stulz, R.
1985.
The Determinants of Firm’s Hedging Policies.
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 20 (4): 391-405; Stulz, R., 1984, Optimal Heding Policies, Journal of Financial and Quanititaitive Analysis, v19, 127-140.

 hedging.
Kale and Noe (1990) make this point when they note that risk hedging can actually reduce value at low debt ratios, because any gains from reduced distress costs are likely to be small and overwhelmed by the costs of hedging.
In contrast, they note that hedging can increase firm value for firms that are optimally levered and thus carry significant debt loads with concurrent distress costs.11d.
Capital Structure

 Closely related to the reduced distress cost benefit is the tax advantage that accrues from additional debt capacity.
Firms that perceive themselves as facing less distress costs are more likely to borrow more.
As long as borrowing creates a tax benefit, this implies that a firm that hedges away large risks will borrow more money and have a lower cost of capital.
The payoff will be a higher value for the business.12

 The evidence on whether hedging does increase debt capacity is mixed.
In supporting evidence, One study documents a link between risk hedging and debt capacity by examining 698 publicly traded firms between 1998 and 2003.
This study notes that firms that buy property insurance (and thus hedge against real estate risk) borrow more money and have lower costs of debt than firms that do not.13 Another study provides evidence on why firms hedge by looking at firms that use derivatives.
The researchers conclude that these firms do so not in response to convex tax functions but primarily to increase debt capacity and that the these tax benefits add approximately 1.1% in value to these firms.
They also find that firms with more debt are more likely to hedge and that hedging leads to higher leverage.14 However, there is other research that contests these

 11 Kale, J.R., and T.H.
Noe, 1990, Corporate Hedging under Personal and Corporate Taxation, Managerial and Decision Economics, v11, 199-205.
12 Leland, H., 1998, Agency Costs, Risk Management and Capital Structure, Journal of Finance, v53, 1213-1243.
He combined the investment and financing arguments in arguing that firms can increase value by hedging.
Firms that pre-commit to hedging against risk can borrow more money and lower their costs of capital.
13 Zou, H.
and M.B.
Adams, 2004, Debt Capacity, Cost of Debt and Corporate Insurance, Working Paper, SSrn.com.
14 Graham, J.R.
and D.
A.
Rogers, 2002, Do firms hedge in response to tax incentives?, Journal of Finance, v57, 815-839.findings.
To provide one instance, Gercy, Minton and Schraud examine firms that use currency derivatives and find no link between their usage and higher debt ratios.15e.
Informational Benefits

 Hedging away risks that are unrelated to the core business of a firm can also make financial statements more informative and investors may reward the firm with a higher value.
Thus, the changes in earnings for a multinational that hedges exchange rate risk will reflect the operating performance of the firm rather than the luck of the draw when it comes to exchange rates.
Similarly, a hotel management company that has hedged away or removed its real estate risk exposure can be judged on the quality of the hotel management services that it provides and the revenues generated, rather than the profits or losses created by movements in real estate prices over time.

 In a 1995 paper, DeMarzo and Duffie explore this issue in more detail by looking at both the informational advantages for investors when companies hedge risk and the effect on hedging behavior of how much the hedging behavior is disclosed to investors.
They note that the benefit of hedging is that it allows investors to gauge management quality more easily by stripping extraneous noise from the process.
They also note a possible cost when investors use the observed variability in earnings as a measure of management quality; in other words, investors assume that firms with more stable earnings have superior managers.
If managers are not required to disclose hedging actions to investors, they may have the incentive to hedge too much risk; after all, hedging reduces earnings variability and improves managerial reputation.16A significant number of firms hedge their risk exposures, with wide variations in which risks get hedged and the tools used for hedging.
In this section, we will look at some of the empirical and survey evidence of hedging among firms.15 Gercy, C., B.A.
Minton and C.
Schraud, 1997, Why firms use currency derivatives? Journal of Finance, v , 1323-1354.
16 DeMarzo, P.M.
and D.
Duffie, 1995, Corporate Incentives for Hedging and Hedge Accounting, The Review of Financial Studies, v8, 743-771.Who hedges?

 In 1999, Mian studied the annual reports of 3,022 companies in 1992 and found that 771 of these firms did some risk hedging during the course of the year.
Of these firms, 543 disclosed their hedging activities in the financial statements and 228 mentioned using derivatives to hedge risk but provided no disclosure about the extent of the hedging.
Looking across companies, he concluded that larger firms were more likely to hedge than smaller firms, indicating that economies of scale allow larger firms to hedge at lower costs.17 As supportive evidence of the large fixed costs of hedging, note the results of a survey that found that 45% of Fortune 500 companies used at least one full-time professional for risk management and that almost 15% used three or more full-time equivalents.18

 In an examination in 1996 of risk management practices in the gold mining industry, Tufano makes several interesting observatiions.19 First, almost 85% of the firms in this industry hedged some or a significant portion of gold price risk between 1990 and 1993.
Figure 10.1 summarizes the distribution of the proportion of gold price risk hedged by the firms in the sample.

 17 Mian, S.I., 1996, Evidence on corporate hedging policy, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, v31, 419-439.
18 Dolde, W., 1993, The Trajectory of Corporate Financial Risk Management, Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, v6, 33-41.
19 Tufano, P., 1996, Who manages risk? An Empirical Examination of Risk Management Practices in the Gold Mining Industry, Journal of Finance, v51, 1097-1137.Source: Tufano (1996)What risks are most commonly hedged?

 While a significant proportion of firms hedge against risk, some risks seem to be hedged more often than others.
In this section, we will look at the two most widely hedged risks at U.S.
companies – exchange rate risk and commodity price risk – and consider how and why firms hedge these risks.Exchange Rate Risk

 Surveys consistently indicate that the most widely hedged risk at U.S.
firms remains currency risk.
There are three simple reasons for this phenomenon.
a.
It is ubiquitous: It is not just large multi-national firms that are exposed to exchange rate risk.
Even small firms that derive almost all of their revenues domestically are often dependent upon inputs that come from foreign markets and are thus exposed to exchange

 rate risk.
An entertainment software firm that gets its software written in India for sale in the United States is exposed to variations in the U.S.
dollar/ Indian Rupee exchange rate.
b.
It affects earnings: Accounting conventions also force firms to reflect the effects of exchange rate movements on earnings in the periods in which they occur.
Thus, the earnings per share of firms that do not hedge exchange rate risk will be more volatile than firms that do.
As a consequence, firms are much more aware of the effects of the exchange rate risk, which may provide a motivation for managing it.c.
It is easy to hedge: Exchange rate risk can be managed both easily and cheaply.
Firms can use an array of market-traded instruments including options and futures contracts to reduce or even eliminate the effects of exchange rate risk.

 Merck’s CFO in 1990, Judy Lewent, and John Kearny described the company’s policy on identifying and hedging currency risk.
They rationalized the hedging of currency risk by noting that the earnings variability induced by exchange rate movements could affect Merck’s capacity to pay dividends and continue to invest in R&D, because markets would not be able to differentiate between earnings drops that could be attributed to the managers of the firm and those that were the result of currency risk.
A drop in earnings caused entirely by an adverse exchange rate movement, they noted, could cause the stock price to drop, making it difficult to raise fresh capital to cover needs.20Commodity Price Risk

 While more firms hedge against exchange rate risk than commodity risk, a greater percentage of firms that are exposed to commodity price risk hedge that risk.
Tufano’s study of gold mining companies, cited earlier in this section, notes that most of these firms hedge against gold price risk.
While gold mining and other commodity companies use hedging as a way of smoothing out the revenues that they will receive on the output, there are companies on the other side of the table that use hedging to protect themselves against commodity price risk in their inputs.
For instance, Hershey’s can use futures contracts on cocoa to reduce uncertainty about its costs in the future.20 Lewent, J.
and J.
Kearney, 1990, ”Identifying Measuring and Hedging Currency Risk at Merck,” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, v2, 19-28.

 Southwest Airlines use of derivatives to manage its exposure to fuel price risk provides a simple example of input price hedging and why firms do it.
While some airlines try to pass through increases in fuel prices through to their customers (often unsuccessfully) and otrhers avoid hedging because they feel they can forecast future oil prices, Southwest has viewed it as part of its fiduciary responsibility to its stockholders to hedge fuel price risk.
They use a combination of options, swaps and futures to hedge oil price movements and report on their hedging activities in their financial statements.

 The motivations for hedging commodity price risk may vary across companies and are usually different for companies that hedge against output price risk (like gold companies) as opposed to companies that hedge against input price risk (such as airlines) but the end result is the same.
The former are trying to reduce the volatility in their revenues and the latter are trying to do the same with cost, but the net effect for both groups is more stable and predictable operating income, which presumably allows these firms to have lower distress costs and borrow more.
With both groups, there is another factor at play.
By removing commodity price risk from the mix, firms are letting investors know that their strength lies not in forecasting future commodity prices but in their operational expertise.
A gold mining company is then asking to be judged on its exploration and production expertise, whereas an fuel hedging airline’s operating performance will reflect its choice of operating routes and marketing skills.

 Hedging risks has both implicit and explicit costs that can vary depending upon the risk being hedged and the hedging tool used, and the benefits include better investment decisions, lower distress costs, tax savings and more informative financial statements.
The trade off seems simple; if the benefits exceed the costs, you should hedge and if the costs exceed the benefits, you should not.

 This simple set-up is made more complicated when we consider the investors of the firm and the costs they face in hedging the same risks.
If hedging a given risk creates benefits to the firm, and the hedging can be done either by the firm or by investors in the firm, the hedging will add value only if the cost of hedging is lower to the firm than it is to investors.
Thus, a firm may be able to hedge its exposure to sector risk by acquiring

 firms in other businesses, but investors can hedge the same risk by holding diversified portfolios.
The premiums paid in acquisitions will dwarf the transactions costs faced by the latter; this is clearly a case where the risk hedging strategy will be value destroying.
In contrast, consider an airline that is planning on hedging its exposure to oil price risk because it reduces distress costs.
Since it is relatively inexpensive to buy oil options and futures and the firm is in a much better position to know its oil needs than its investors, this is a case where risk hedging by the firm will increase value.
Figure 10.2 provides a flowchart for determining whether firms should hedge or not hedge the risks that they arefaced with.risk.The evidence on whether risk hedging increases value is mixed.
In a book on risk management, Smithson presents evidence that he argues is consistent with the notion that risk management increases value, but the increase in value at firms that hedge is small

 and not statistically significant.21 The study by Mian, referenced in the last section, finds only weak or mixed evidence of the potential hedging benefits– lower taxes and distress costs or better investment decisions.
In fact, the evidence in inconsistent with a distress cost model, since the companies with the greatest distress costs hedge the least.
Tufano’s study of gold mining companies, also referenced in the last section, also finds little support for the proposition that hedging is driven by the value enhancement concerns; rather, he concludes that managerial compensation mechanisms and risk aversion explain the differences in risk management practices across these companies.

 In summary, the benefits of hedging are hazy at best and non-existent at worst, when we look at publicly traded firms.
While we have listed many potential benefits of hedging including tax savings, lower distress costs and higher debt ratios, there is little evidence that they are primary motivators for hedging at most companies.
In fact, a reasonable case can be made that most hedging can be attributed to managerial interests being served rather than increasing stockholder value.

 If you decide to reduce your exposure to a risk or risks, there are several approaches that you can use.
Some of these are integrated into the standard investment and financing decisions that every business has to make; your risk exposure is determined by the assets that you invest in and by the financing that you use to fund these assets.
Some have been made available by a large and growing derivatives markets where options, futures and swaps can be used to manage risk exposure.

 Some of the risk that a firm is exposed to is mitigated by the investment decisions that it makes.
Consider retail firms like the Gap and Ann Taylor.
One of the risks that they face is related to store location, with revenues and operating income being affected by foot traffic at the mall or street that a store is placed on.
This risk is lowered by the fact that these firms also have dozens of store locations in different parts of the country; a21 Smithson, C., 1999, Does risk management work?, Risk, July 1999, pp 44-45.less-than-expected foot traffic at one store can be made up for with more-then-expected foot traffic at another store.

 It is not just the firm-specific risks (like location) that can be affected by investment decisions.
Companies like Citicorp and Coca Cola have argued that their exposure to country risk, created by investing in emerging markets with substantial risk, is mitigated (though not eliminated) by the fact that they operate in dozens of countries.
A sub-standard performance in one country (say Brazil) can be offset by superior performance in another (say India).

 Strategists and top managers of firms that diversify into multiple businesses have often justified this push towards becoming conglomerates by noting that diversification reduces earnings variability and makes firms more stable.
While they have a point, a distinction has to be drawn between this risk reduction and the examples cited in the previous two paragraphs.
Ann Taylor, The Gap, Citicorp and Coca Cola can all reduce risk through their investment choices without giving up on the base principle of picking good investments.
Thus, the Gap can open only good stores and still end up with dozens of stores in different locations.
In contrast, a firm that decides to become a conglomerate by acquiring firms in other businesses has to pay significant acquisition premiums.
There are usually more cost-effective ways of accomplishing the same objective.

 Firms can affect their overall risk exposure through their financing choices.
A firm that expects to have significant cash inflows in yen on a Japanese investment can mitigate some of that risk by borrowing in yen to fund the investment.
A drop in the value of the yen will reduce the expected cash inflows (in dollar terms) but there will be at least a partially offsetting impact that will reduce the expected cash outflows in dollar terms.

 The conventional advice to companies seeking to optimize their financing choices has therefore been to match the characteristics of debt to more of the project funded with the debt.
The failure to do so increases default risk and the cost of debt, thus increasing the cost of capital and lowering firm value.
Conversely, matching debt to assets in termsof maturity and currency can reduce default risk and the costs of debt and capital, leading to higher firm value.What are the practical impediments to this debt matching strategy? First, firms

 that are restricted in their access to bond markets may be unable to borrow in their preferred mode.
Most firms outside and even many firms in the United States have access only to bank borrowing and are thus constrained by what banks offer.
If, as is true in many emerging markets, banks are unwilling to lend long term in the local currency, firms with long-term investments will have to borrow short term or in a different currency to fund their needs.
Second, there can be market frictions that make it cheaper for a firm to borrow in one market than another; a firm that has a low profile internationally but a strong reputation in its local market may be able to borrow at a much lower rate in the local currency (even after adjusting for inflation differences across currencies).
Consequently, it may make sense to raise debt in the local currency to fund investments in other markets, even though this leads to a mismatching of debt and assets.
Third, the debt used to fund investments can be affected by views about the overall market; a firm that feels that short term rates are low, relative to long term rates, may borrow short term to fund long term investments with the objective of shifting to longterm debt later.

 One of the oldest and most established ways of protecting against risk is to buy insurance to cover specific event risk.
Just as a home owner buys insurance on his or her house to protect against the eventuality of fire or storm damage, companies can buy insurance to protect their assets against possible loss.
In fact, it can be argued that, in spite of the attention given to the use of derivatives in risk management, traditional insurance remains the primary vehicle for managing risk.Insurance does not eliminate risk.
Rather, it shifts the risk from the firm buying the insurance to the insurance firm selling it.
Smith and Mayers argued that this risk

 shifting may provide a benefit to both sides, for a number of reasons.22 First, the insurance company may be able to create a portfolio of risks, thereby gaining diversification benefits that the self-insured firm itself cannot obtain.
Second, the insurance company might acquire the expertise to evaluate risk and process claims more efficiently as a consequence of its repeated exposure to that risk.
Third, insurance companies might provide other services, such as inspection and safety services that benefit both sides.
While a third party could arguably provide the same service, the insurance company has an incentive to ensure the quality of the service.

 From ancient ship owners who purchased insurance against losses created by storms and pirates to modern businesses that buy insurance against terrorist acts, the insurance principle has remained unchanged.
From the standpoint of the insured, the rationale for insurance is simple.
In return for paying a premium, they are protected against risks that have a low probability of occurrence but have a large impact if they do.
The cost of buying insurance becomes part of the operating expenses of the business, reducing the earnings of the company.
The benefit is implicit and shows up as more stable earnings over time.

 The insurer offers to protect multiple risk takers against specific risks in return for premiums and hopes to use the collective income from these premiums to cover the losses incurred by a few.
As long as the risk being insured against affects only a few of the insured at any point in time, the laws of averaging work in the insurer’s favor.
The expected payments to those damaged by the risk will be lower than the expected premiums from the population.
Consequently, we can draw the following conclusions about the effectiveness of insurance:22 Smith, C.W.
and D.
Mayers, On the Corporate Demand for Insurance, Journal of Business, v55, 281- 296.time.
In contrast, it is more difficult and dangerous to self-insure against large or catastrophic risks, since one occurrence can put you out of business.Reviewing the conditions, it is easy to see why insurance is most often used to hedge against “acts of god” – events that often have catastrophic effects on specific localities but leave the rest of the population relatively untouched.

 Derivatives have been used to manage risk for a very long time, but they were available only to a few firms and at high cost, since they had to be customized for each user.
The development of options and futures markets in the 1970s and 1980s allowed for the standardization of derivative products, thus allowing access to even individuals who wanted to hedge against specific risk.
The range of risks that are covered by derivatives grows each year, and there are very few market-wide risks that you cannot hedge today using options or futures.Futures and Forwards

 The most widely used products in risk management are futures, forwards, options and swaps.
These are generally categorized as derivative products, since they derive their value from an underlying asset that is traded.
While there are fundamental differences among these products, the basic building blocks for all of them are similar.
To examine the common building blocks for each of these products, let us begin with the simplest –– the forward contract.
In a forward contract, the buyer of the contract agrees to buy a product (which can be a commodity or a currency) at a fixed price at a specified period in the future; the seller of the contract agrees to deliver the product in return for the fixed price.
Since the forward price is fixed while the spot price of the underlying asset changes, we can measure the cash payoff from the forward contract to both the buyer andthe seller of the forward contract at the expiration of the contract as a function of the spot price and present it in Figure 10.3.

 A futures contract, like a forward contract, is an agreement to buy or sell an underlying asset at a specified time in the future.
Therefore, the payoff diagram on a futures contract is similar to that of a forward contract.
There are, however, three major differences between futures and forward contract.
First, futures contracts are traded on exchanges whereas forward contracts are not.
Consequently, futures contracts are much more liquid and there is no default or credit risk; this advantage has to be offset against

 the fact that futures contracts are standardized and cannot be adapted to meet the firm’s precise needs.
Second, futures contracts require both parties (buyer and seller) to settle differences on a daily basis rather than waiting for expiration.
Thus, if a firm buys a futures contract on oil, and oil prices go down, the firm is obligated to pay the seller of the contract the difference.
Because futures contracts are settled at the end of every day, they are converted into a sequence of one-day forward contracts.
This can have an effect on their pricing.
Third, when a futures contract is bought or sold, the parties are required to put up a percentage of the price of the contract as a “margin.” This operates as a performance bond, ensuring there is no default risk.

 Options differ from futures and forward contracts in their payoff profiles, which limit losses to the buyers to the prices paid for the options.
Recapping our discussion in the appendix to chapter 8, call options give buyers the rights to buy a specified asset at a fixed price anytime before expiration, whereas put options gives buyers the right to sell a specified asset at a fixed price.
Figure 10.4 illustrates the payoffs to the buyers of call and put options when the options expire.Figure 10.4: Payoff on Call and Put Options at Expirationreversed for a put option.
The buyer profits if the value of the asset is less than the strike price and loses the price paid for the put if it is greater.

 There are two key differences between options and futures.
The first is that options provide protection against downside risk, while allowing you to partake in upside potential.
Futures and forwards, on the other hand, protect you against downside risk while eliminating upside potential.
A gold mining company that sells gold futures contracts to hedge against movements in gold prices will find itself protected if gold prices go down but will also have to forego profits if gold prices go up.
The same company will get protection against lower gold prices by buying put options on gold but will still be able to gain if gold prices increase.
The second is that options contracts have explicit costs, whereas the cost with futures contracts is implicit; other than transactions and settlement costs associated with day-to-day gold price movements, the gold mining company will face little in costs from selling gold futures but it will have to pay to buy put options on gold.

 In its simplest form, titled a plain vanilla swap, you offer to swap a set of cash flows for another set of cash flows of equivalent market value at the time of the swap.
Thus, a U.S, company that expects cash inflows in Euros from a European contract can swaps thee for cash flows in dollars, thus mitigating currency risk.
To provide a more concrete illustration of the use of swaps to manage exchange rate risk, consider an airline that wants to hedge against fuel price risk.
The airline can enter into a swap to pay a fixed price for oil and receive a floating price, with both indexed to fuel usage during a period.
During the period, the airline will continue to buy oil in the cash market, but the swap market makes up the difference when prices rise.
Thus, if the floating price is $1.00 per gallon and the fixed price is $0.85 per gallon, the floating rate payer makes a $0.15 per gallon payment to the fixed rate payer.Broken down to basics, a plain vanilla swap is a portfolio of forward contracts and can therefore be analyzed as such.
In recent years, swaps have become increasingly more complex and many of these more complicated swaps can be written as combinations of options and forward contracts.Once firms have decided to hedge or manage a specific risk, they have to pick among competing products to achieve this objective.
To make this choice, let us review their costs and benefits:matching forward contract cannot be created.23As with everything else in corporate finance, firms have to make the trade off.
The objective, after all, is not complete protection against risk, but as much protection as makes sense, given the marginal benefits and costs of acquiring it.
A survey of the risk23 Giddy, I., 1983, Foreign Exchange Options, Journal of Futures Markets.products that 500 multinationals in the United States used, concluded that forward contracts remain the dominant tool for risk management , at least for currency risk, and that there is a shift from hedging transaction exposure to economic exposure.24

 This chapter examines the questions of which questions to hedge and which ones to pass through.
We began by looking at the process of risk profiling, where we outline the risks faced by a business, categorize that risk, consider the tools available to manage that risk and the capabilities of the firm in dealing with that risk.
We then move on to look at the costs and benefits of hedging.
The costs of hedging can be explicit when we use insurance or put options that protect against downside risk while still providing upside potential and implicit when using futures and forwards, where we give up profit potential if prices move favorably in return for savings when there are adverse price movements.
There are five possible benefits from hedging: tax savings either from smoother earnings or favorable tax treatment of hedging costs and payoffs, a reduced likelihood of distress and the resulting costs, higher debt capacity and the resulting tax benefits, better investment decisions and more informational financial statements.

 While there are potential benefits to hedging and plenty of evidence that firms hedge, there is surprisingly little empirical support for the proposition that hedging adds value.
The firms that hedge do not seem to be motivated by tax savings or reduce distress costs, but more by managerial interests – compensation systems and job protection are often tied to maintaining more stable earnings.
As the tools to hedge risk – options, futures, swaps and insurance – all multiple, the purveyors of these tools also have become more skilled at selling them to firms that often do not need them or should not be using them.24 Jesswein, K., Kwok, C.
C.
Y.
and Folks, W.
R.
Jr., 1995, “What New Currency Products are Companies Using and Why?,” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, v8, 103-114.

 Why would risk-averse individuals and entities ever expose themselves intentionally to risk and increase that exposure over time? One reason is that they believe that they can exploit these risks to advantage and generate value.
How else can you explain why companies embark into emerging markets that have substantial political and economic risk or into technologies where the ground rules change on a day-to-day basis? By the same token, the most successful companies in every sector and in each generation – General Motors in the 1920s, IBM in the 1950s and 1960s, Microsoft and Intel in the 1980s and 1990s and Google in this decade- share a common characteristic.
They achieved their success not by avoiding risk but by seeking it out.

 There are some who would attribute the success of these companies and others like them to luck, but that can explain businesses that are one-time wonders – a single successful product or service.
Successful companies are able to go back to the well again and again, replicating their success on new products and in new markets.
To do so, they must have a template for dealing with risk that gives them an advantage over the competition.
In this chapter, we consider how best to organize the process of risk taking to maximize the odds of success.
In the process, we will have to weave through many different functional areas of business, from corporate strategy to finance to operations management, that have traditionally not been on talking terms.

 It is true that risk exposes us to potential losses but risk also provides us with opportunities.
A simple vision of successful risk taking is that we should expand our exposure to upside risk while reducing the potential for downside risk.
In this section,, we will first revisit the discussion of the payoff to risk taking that we initiated in chapter 9 and then look at the evidence on the success of such a strategy.

 It is simplest to consider the payoff to risk in a conventional discounted cash flow model.
The value of a firm is the present value of the expected cash flows, discounted back at a risk-adjusted rate and derives from four fundamentals – the cash flows from existing investments, the growth rate in these cash flows over a high-growth period accompanied usually by excess returns on new investments, the length of this high growth period and the cost of funding (capital) both existing and new investments.
In this context, the effects of risk taking can manifest in all of these variables:from those investments.

 The final and most complete measure of good risk taking is whether the value of a firm increases as a consequence of its risk taking, which, in turn, will be determined by whether the positive effects of the risk taking – higher excess returns over a longer growth period – exceed the negative consequences – more volatile earnings and apotentially higher cost of capital.
Figure 11.1 captures the effects of risk taking on all of the dimensions of value.

 The other way to consider the payoff to risk taking is to use the real options framework developed in chapter 8.
If the essence of good risk taking is that you increase your share of good risk – the upside- while restricting your exposure to bad risk – the downside – it should take on the characteristics of a call option.
Figure 11.2 captures the option component inherent in good risk taking:

 It is easy to find anecdotal evidence that risk taking pays off for some individuals and organizations.
Microsoft took a risk in designing an operating system for a then nascent product – the personal computer- but it paid off by making the company one of the most valuable businesses in the world.
Google also took a risk when it deviated from industry practice and charged advertisers based on those who actually visited their sites (rather than on total traffic), but it resulted in financial success.1 The problem with anecdotal evidence is that it can be easily debunked as either luck – Microsoft and Google happened to be at the right place at the right time - or by providing counterexamples of companies that took risks that did not pay off – IBM did take a risk in entering the personal computer business in the 1980s and had little to show for this in terms of profitability and value.The more persuasive evidence for risk taking generating rewards comes from

 looking at the broader cross section of all investors and firms and the payoff to risk taking and that evidence is more nuanced.
On the one hand, there is clear evidence that risk taking collectively has lead to higher returns for both investors and firms.
For instance, investors in the United States who chose to invest their savings in equities in the twentieth century generated returns that were significantly higher than those generated by investors who remained invested in safer investments such as government and corporate bonds.
Companies in sectors categorized as high risk, with risk defined either in market terms or in accounting terms, have, on average, generated higher returns for investors than lower risk companies.
There is persuasive evidence that firms in sectors with more volatile earnings or stock prices have historically earned higher returns than firms in sectors with staid earnings and stable stock prices.
Within sectors, there is some evidence albeit mixed, that risk taking generates higher returns for firms.
A study of the 50 largest U.S.
oil companies between 1981 and 2002, for instance, finds that firms that take more risk when it comes to exploration and development earn higher returns than firms thattake less.2

 On the other hand, there is also evidence that risk taking can sometimes hurt companies and that some risk taking, at least on average, seems foolhardy.
In a widely quoted study in management journals, a study by Bowman uncovered a negative relationship between risk and return in most sectors, a surprise given the conventional wisdom that higher risk and higher returns go hand-in-hand, at least in the aggregate.3 This phenomenon, risk taking with more adverse returns, has since been titled the “Bowman paradox” and has been subjected to a series of tests.
In follow up studies,

 1 Battelle, J., 2005, The Search: How Google and its Rivals Rewrote the Rules of Business and Transformed our Culture, Penguin Books, London.
2 Wallis, M.R., 2005, Corporate Risk Taking and Performance: A 20-year look at the Petroleum Industry.
Wallis estimates the risk tolerance measure for each of the firms in the sector by looking at the decisions made by the firms in terms of investment opportunities.
3 Bowman, E.H., 1980, A risk/return paradox for strategic management, Sloan Management Review, v21, 17-31.

 Bowman argued that a firm’s risk attitudes may influence risk taking and that more troubled firms often take greater and less justifiable risks.4 A later study broke down firms into those that earn below and above target level returns (defined as the industry- average return on equity) and noted a discrepancy in the risk/return trade off.
Firms that earned below the target level became risk seekers and the relationship between risk and return was negative, whereas returns and risk were positive correlated for firms earnings above target level returns.5

 In conclusion, then, there is a positive payoff to risk taking but not if it is reckless.
Firms that are selective about the risks they take can exploit those risks to advantage, but firms that take risks without sufficiently preparing for their consequences can be hurt badly.
This chapter is designed to lay the foundations for sensible risk assessment, where firms can pick and choose from across multiple risks those risks that they stand the best chance of exploiting for value creation.In the process of doing business, it is inevitable that you will be faced with

 unexpected and often unpleasant surprises that threaten to undercut and even destroy your business.
That is the essence of risk and how you respond to it will determine whether you survive and succeed.
In this section, we consider five ways in which you may be make use of risk to gain an advantage over your competitors.
The first is access to better and more timely information about events as they occur and their consequences, allowing you to tailor a superior response to the situation.
The second is the speed with which you respond to the changed circumstances in terms of modifying how and where you do business; by acting faster than your competitors, you may be able to turn a threat into an opportunity.
The third advantage derives from your past experience with similar crises in the past and your knowledge of how the market was affected by those crises, enabling you to respond better than other firms in the business.
The fourth derives from having resources – financial and personnel – that allow you to ride out the rough periods that4 Bowman, E.H, 1982, Risk Seeking by Troubled Firms, Sloan Management Review, v23, 33-42.
5 Fiegenbaum, A.
and H.
Thomas, 1988, Attitudes towards Risk and the Risk-Return Paradox: Prospect Theory Explanations, Academy of Management Journal, v31, 85-106.

 follow a crisis better than the rest of the sector.
The final factor is financial and operating flexibility; being able to change your technological base, operations or financial structure in response to a changed environment can provide a firm with a significant advantage in an uncertain environment.
The key with all of these advantages is that you emerge from the crises stronger, from a competitive position, than you were prior to the crisis.

 During the Second World War, cryptographers employed by the allied army were able to break the code used by the German and Japanese armies to communicate with each other.6 The resulting information played a crucial rule in the defeat of German forces in Europe and the recapture of the Pacific by the U.S.
Navy.
While running a business may not have consequences of the same magnitude, access to good information is just as critical for businesses in the aftermath of crises.
In June 2006, for instance, the military seized power in Thailand in a largely bloodless coup while the prime minister of the country was on a trip to the United States.
If you were a firm with significant investments in Thailand, your response would have been largely dependent upon what you believed the consequences of the coup to be.
The problem, in crises like these, is that good intelligence becomes difficult to obtain, but having reliable information can provide an invaluable edge in crafting the right response.

 How can firms that operate in risky businesses or risky areas of the world lay the groundwork for getting superior information? First, they have to invest in information networks – human intelligence as the CIA or KGB would have called it in the cold war era – and vet and nurture the agents in the network well ahead of crises.
Lest this be seen as an endorsement of corporate skullduggery, businesses can use their own employees and the entities that they deal with – suppliers, creditors and joint venture partners – as sources of information.
Second, the reliability of the intelligence network has to be tested well before the crisis hits with the intent of removing the weak links and augmenting its strengths.
Third, the network has to be protected from the prying eyes of competitors who may be tempted to raid it rather than design their own.
A study ofSouthern California Edison’s experiences in designing an information system to meet power interruptions caused by natural disasters, equipment breakdowns and accidents made theee general recommendations on system design:7

 As companies invest billions in information technology (IT), one of the questions that should be addressed is how this investment will help in developing an information edge during crises.
After all, the key objective of good information technology is not that every employee has an updated computer with the latest operating system on it but that information flows quickly and without distortion through the organization in all directions – from top management to those in the field, from those working in the trenches (and thus in the middle of the crisis) to those at the top and within personnel at each level.
Porter and Millar integrate information technology into the standard strategic forces framework and argue that investments in information technology can enhance strategic advantages.
In figure 11.3, we modify their framework to consider the interaction with risk:6 Code breakers at Bletchley Park solved messages from a large number of Axis code and cipher systems, including the German Enigma machine.
7 Housel, T.J., O.A.
El Sawry and P.F.
Donovan, 1986, Information Systems for Crisis Management: Lessons fromFigure 11.3: Information Technology and Strategic RisksInformation can be used to both pre-empt competition and react quickly if new competitors show up

 As information becomes both more plentiful and easier to access, the challenge that managers often face is not that they do not have enough information but that there is too much and that it is often contradictory and chaotic.
A study by the Economist Intelligence Unit in 2005 confirmed this view, noting that while information is everywhere, it is often disorganized and difficult to act on, with 55% of the 120 managers that they surveyed agreeing that information as provided currently is not adequately prioritized.
The key to using information to advantage, when confronted with risk, is that there be a screening mechanism that not only separates reliable from unreliable information but also provides decision makers with the tools to make sense of the information.

 As a final point, it is worth emphasizing that having better information is one part of successfully exploiting risk but it is not a sufficient or even necessary pre-condition.
A study of intelligence in military operations found that while good intelligence is a factor in success, it is only one factor, and there are cases where armies have failed despite having superior information and succeeded notwithstanding poor information.When case studies are written of effective responses to crises, whether they are political or economic, they generally highlight the speed of response.
One reason Johnson and Johnson was able to minimize the damage ensuing from the Tylenol poisoning scare

 in the mid 1980s was that it removed bottles of the pills immediately from store shelves and responded with a massive public relations blitz, warning consumers about the dangers, while reassuring them that it had matters under control.
In contrast, the Federal Emergency Management Administration (FEMA) was lambasted for the slowness with which it responded to the breaching of levies in New Orleans in 2005, in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina.
J&J’s actions did not just reduce the costs from the tampering incident but the goodwill and credibility gained by their response might have actually made the incident a net benefit for them in the long term.8 In essence, the company turned into practice the adage that every threat is also an opportunity.

 So, what determines the speed of the response? One factor is the quality of the information that you receive about the nature of the threat and its consequences – the information advantage that we noted in the last section is often a key part of reacting quickly.
The second factor is recognizing both the potential short term and long-term consequences of the threat.
All too often, entities under threat respond to the near term effects by going into a defensive posture and either downplaying the costs or denying the risks when they would be better served by being open about the dangers and what they are doing to protect against them.
The third factor is understanding the audience and constituencies that you are providing the response for; Johnson and Johnson recognized that they key group that needed reassurance was not analysts worried about the financial consequences but potential future customers.
Rather than downplay the threat, which would have been the response that reassured investors, the firm chose to take the highlight the potential dangers and its responses.
While no one template works for every firm, the most successful respondents to crisis maintain a balance between stockholders,customers and potential or actual victims of the crisis.9

 8 Johnson and Johnson consistently has ranked at the top of firms for corporate reputation in the years since the Tylenol scare, showing that the way in which you respond to crises can have very long term consequences.
9 Firms often have to weigh the interests of stockholders against crisis victims.
A study that looked at accidents found that stockholders suffer losses when managers are overly accommodating to victims in accidents, but that accommodation is often the best option when companies are embroiled in scandal (and thus cannot blame Mother Nature or external forces).
Marcus, A.A.
and R.S.
Goodman, 1991, Victims and Shareholders: The Dilemma of Presenting Corporate Policy during a crisis, Academy of Management Journal, v34, 281-305.In effect, it is not just that you respond quickly to crises, but the appropriateness

 of the response that determines whether you succeed in weathering the crisis and emerging stronger from the experience.
The organizational structure and culture of firms also seem to play a role in how effective they are at responding to challenges.
An examination of the practices of Japanese manufacturers concluded that firms that responded quickly to market changes tended to share information widely across the organization and its partners and to have small teams that were allowed to make decisions without senior management overview.10 A study of the decision processes at four firms in the microcomputer industry, with the intent of uncovering the determinants of the speed of this response, found that firms that succeeded were able to straddle paradoxical positions: they were able to make decisions quickly but carefully, they had powerful CEOs who co-existed with a powerful top management team, and they made innovative and risky decisions while providing for safe and incremental implementation.11

 While it is true that no two crises are exact replicas, it is also true that having experienced similar crises in the past can give you an advantage.
In economies with high and volatile inflation, for instance, firms develop coping mechanisms ranging from flexible pricing policies to labor contracts that are tied to changing inflation.
Thus, a surge in inflation that is devastating to competitors from more mature markets (with stable inflation) is taken in stride by these firms.
In a similar vein, firms that are in *countries that are subject to frequent currency devaluations or real economic volatility organize themselves in ways that allow them to survive these crises.How important is experience in dealing with crises? A study of political crises that looked at leaders as diverse as Talleyrand, Wellington, Bismarck, Metternich and Gromyko, whose stewardship extended across decades and multiple crises, concluded10 Stalk, Jr., G., and T.
M.
Hout, 1990, Competing Against Time: How Time-Based Competition Is Reshaping Global Markets, The Free Press, New York.
11Bourgeois, L.J.
and K.M.
Eisenhardt, 1988, Strategic Decision Processes in High Velocity Environments: Four Cases in the Microcomputer Industry, Management Science, v34, 816-835.

 that their lengthy tenure in office made them better as crisis managers.12 Studies of decision making by board members in a variety of different environments conclude that decisions are made more quickly if decision makers are more experienced.13 Finally, an analysis of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) as a crisis manager from its inception in 1944 until the peso crisis that hit Mexico in 1994 establishes a similar pattern of improvement, where the organization learned from its mistakes in initial crises to improve its management in subsequent ones.
In summary, experience at both the individual and institutional level lead to better and quicker decisions when faced withrisk.How does a firm that does not operate in unstable environments and thus does not have the history acquire this experience? There are at least three possible routes:

 12 Wallace, M.D.
and P.
Suedfeld, 1988, Leadership Performance in Crisis: The Longevity-Complexity Link, International Studies Quarterly, v 32, 439-451.
13 Judge, W.Q.
and A.
Miller, 1991, Antecedents and Outcomes of Decision Speed in Different Environmental Contexts, Academy of Management Journal, v34, 448-483.
Similar results are reported in Vance, S.C., 1983, Corporate Leadership: Boards, Directors and Strategy, McGraw Hill, New York.first place.
As a result of these and other factors, there is evidence that these acquisitions are more likely to fail than succeed.14that Ebay hoped to draw upon in their joint venture.

 Even within markets, the importance of knowledge and experience can vary widely across sectors.
Professional service firms such as consultants, investment banks and advertising agencies are built on the learning and experience that they have accumulated over time, and use the knowledge to attract more customers and to provide better services.
In fact, Knowledge Management or KM is the study of how best to use this accumulated know-how and experience in growing and volatile markets as a competitive advantage.15 To provide an illustration of how firms are marrying accumulated knowledge with advances in information technology, consider the Knowledge On-Line (KOL) system devised by Booz Allen & Hamilton, the consulting firm.
The system captures and shares the “best practices” of its more experienced consultants as well as

 14 Studies of cross border acquisitions find that the record of failure is high.
A study of acquisitions by U.S.
firms found that cross-border acquisitions consistently delivered lower returns and operating performance than domestic acquisitions; see Moeller, S.B, and F.P., Schlingemann, 2005, Global Diversification and Bidder Gains: A Comparison between Cross-border and Domestic Acquisitions, Journal of Banking and Finance, v29, 533-564..
Similar results have been reported for U.K firms (Chatterjee, R and M.
Aw, 2000, The performance of UK firms acquiring large cross-border and domestic takeover targets, Judge Institute of Management Studies Research Paper WP07/00, Cambridge, United Kingdom.) and Canadian firms (Eckbo, B.E., and K.S.
Thorburn, 2000, Gains to bidder firms revisited: Domestic and foreign acquisitions in Canada, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 35(1), 1-25.) 15 Surveys of consulting firms find that a very high percentage of them have tried to build knowledge management systems, marrying information technology advances with the expertise of the people working at these firms.synthesizing the ideas of its experts in ways that can be generalized across clients, with the intent of building on learning over time.Having the resources to deal with crises as they occur can give a company a

 significant advantage over its competitors.
Consider, for instance, the market meltdown that occurred in Argentina in 2001, when the country defaulted on its foreign currency debt and markets essentially shut down.
Companies that had the foresight to accumulate large cash balances and liquid assets before the crisis were not only able to survive but to also buy assets owned by more desperate competitors for cents on the dollar.
Illustrating the two-tier system that has developed in many emerging markets, Argentine companies with depository receipts (ADRs) listed in the United States were able to use their continued access to capital to establish an advantage over their purely domestic counterparts.
Having cash on hand or access to capital proved to be the defining factor in success in this crisis.
There are other resources that firms can draw on to deal with risk, including human capital.
An investment bank with more experienced and savvy traders is in a better position to survive a crisis in its primary trading markets and perhaps even profit from the risk.

 The link between capital access – either through markets or by having large cash balances – and survival during crises is well established.
A study of emerging market companies that list depository receipts on the U.S.
stock exchanges notes that the increased access to capital markets allowed these firms to be freer in their investment decisions and less sensitive to year-to-year movements in their cashflows.16 There was also a consequent increase in stock prices for these companies after cross listings.
Similarly, studies of cash balances at companies finds evidence that cash holdings are higher at riskier companies in more unstable economies, primarily as protection againstrisk.17

 16 Lins, K., D.
Strickland, and M.
Zenner, 2005, Do non-U.S.
firms issue equity on U.S.
stock exchanges to relax capital constraints? Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 40, 109-134.
17 Custodio, C.
and C.
Raposo, 2004, Cash Holdings and Business Conditions, Working Paper, SSRN.
This paper finds strong evidence that financially constrained firms adjust their cash balance to reflect overall business conditions, holding more cash during recessions.
Firms that are not financially constrained alsoHow can firms go about establishing a capital advantage? For private businesses,

 it can come from being publicly traded, whereas for publicly traded firms, increased capital access can come from opening up their investor base to include foreign investors (by having foreign listings or depository receipts) and from expanding their debt from bank loans to include corporate bonds.
Note that there is a cost associated with this increased access to capital; for private business owners, it is the potential loss of control associated with being publicly traded firms, whereas foreign listings, especially for emerging market companies, can increase the need and the cost of information disclosure as well as put pressure for better corporate governance.
Similarly, holding a large cash balance listing may create costs for a company in non-crisis periods; the cash balance will generate low (though riskless) returns and may increase the likelihood that the firm will be taken over.

 In the 1920s and 1930s, Ford and General Motors fought the early skirmishes in a decades long battle to dominate the automobile business.
While Henry Ford introduced the Model T Ford, available in one color (black) and one model, and generated the benefits of economies of scale, General Motors adopted a different strategy.
The company emphasized a more adaptable design, and a production line that could be revamped at short notice to reflect changing customer desires.18 The flexibility that GM acquired as a consequence allowed them to win that battle and dominate the business for several decades thereafter.
In an ironic twist, as oil prices shot up in 2004 and 2005, and GM and Ford struggled to convince customers to keep buying their existing line of SUVs, minivans and other gas guzzlers, it was Toyota that was able to modify its production processes to speed up the delivery of its hybrid entry – the Toyota Prius – and

 exhibit the same pattern, but the linkage is much weaker.
Their findings are similar to those in another paper by Baum, C.F., M.
Caglayan, N.
Ozkan and O.
Talvera, 2004, The Impact of Macroeconomic Uncertainty on Cash Holdings for Non-financial Service Firms, Working Paper, SSRN.
18 Alfred Sloan, the CEO of GM, introduced the concept of dynamic obsolescence, where designs and product characteristics were changed an annual basis, both to reflect changing customer tastes and to influence customers.
At the same time, he also hired Harley Earl, a design genius, to invent a ‘styling bridge’ that would allow multiple models to share the same design, thus saving both cost and time in development.put itself on a path to being the most profitable automobile manufacturer in the world.
In both cases, being able to modify production, operating and marketing processes quickly proved key to being able to take advantage of risk.While a flexible response to changing circumstances can be a generic advantage,

 it can take different forms.
For some firms, it can be production facilities that can be adapted at short notice to produce modified products that better fit customer demand; this is the advantage that GM in the 1920s and Toyota in 2005 used to gain market share and profits.
Alternatively, firms that have production facilities in multiple countries may be able to move production from one country to another, if faced with risks or higher costs.19 For other firms, it can be arise from keeping fixed costs low, thus allowing them to adjust quickly to changing circumstances; the budget airlines from Southwest to Ryanair have used this financial flexibility to stay ahead of their more cost burdened competitors.
As with the other competitive advantages that facilitate risk taking, flexibility comes with a cost.
A firm that adopts a more open and flexible operating or production process may have to pay more up front to develop these process or face higher per unit costs than a firm with a more rigid manufacturing process that delivers better economies of scale.
Southwest Airlines, for instance, has traded off the lost revenues from using regional airports (such as Islip in New York and Burbank in Los Angeles) against the flexibility it obtains in costs and scheduling to establish an advantage over its more conventional competitors in the airline business.
The value of preserving the flexibility to alter production schedules and get into and out of businesses has been examined widely in thereal options literature, presented in more detail in chapter 8.

 In the late 1990s, corporate strategists led by Clayton Christensen at Harvard presented the idea of disruptive innovations, i.e., innovations that fundamentally change the way in which a business is done, and argued that established firms that generate profits from the established technologies are at a disadvantage relative to upstarts in the business.20 Christensen distinguished between two types of disruption – “low end

 19 Kogut, B.
and N.
Kulatilaka, 1994, Operating Flexibility, Global Manufacturing, and the Option Value of a Multinational Network, Management Science, v40, 123-139.
20 Christensen, Clayton M.
(1997).
The Innovator's Dilemma.
Harvard Business School Press.
He makes five points about disruptive technologies: (1) Initially, the disruptive technology under performs the dominant one (2) They serve a few fringe and new customers with products that are cheaper, simpler,

 disruption” targeted at customers who do not need the performance valued by customers at the high end (and do not want to pay those prices) and “new market disruption” targeting customers not served by existing businesses.
He used the disk drive business to illustrate his case and presented the process through which a new technology displaces an existing one in five steps (shown in figure 11.4):Figure 11.4: Disruptive TechnologyThe triumph of disruptive technology

 Christensen’s thesis was a provocative one since it suggested that past successes in a business can conspire against a company that tries to adapt to new technology or changes in the way business is done.
As an example of disruptive technology, consider the growth of the University of Phoenix, an online university aimed at part time and working students who wanted a university degree at relatively low cost (in both time and resources).
Their established competitors – conventional universities – have too much invested in the traditional form of schooling, and consider an online university degree to be sub-standard relative their own offerings, to offer much of a challenge.
The interesting question is whether online universities will be able to use technology to ultimately challenge universities at their own game and eventually beat them.
Those in the disruptive technology school were also able to buttress their arguments by pointing to the advent of online businesses in the dot-com boom and the incapacity of conventional companies to contest young start-ups; Amazon.com was able to take business away fromsmaller or more conveninent than existing products (3) The disruptive technology initially is targeted at small and less profitable markets and thus not viewed as a threat by established companies (4) The disruptive technology improves over time until it matches or even beats the dominant technology (5)brick and mortar retailers because it could invest itself fully to online retailing, whereas its more established competitors had to weigh the costs created for its existing businesses.

 While the message delivered by studies of disruptive technologies is sobering for established companies, there are ways in which a few of them have learned to thrive even as markets, products and technologies change.
In an examination of 66 consumer markets and the survivors and failures within these markets, Tellis and Golder conclude that incumbent companies that survive and beat back upstarts tend to share several characteristics: they prize innovation and are paranoid about challenges and they are also willing to cannibalize existing product lines to introduce new ones.21 For the former, they provide the examples of Procter and Gamble, Intel and Microsoft and Gillette’s willingness to undercut its own shaving market with new razors is offered as an illustration of the latter.
An alternative path to success was provided by Apple Computers and its success with both iTunes, a clearly disruptive technology that upended the traditional music retailing business, and the iPod.
First, Apple chose to target businesses outside of their own traditional domain, thus reducing the cost to existing business; Apple was primarily a computer hardware and software company when it entered the music business.
Second, Apple created an independent “iTunes” team to make decisions on the music business that would not by contaminated by the history, culture or business concerns of the computer business.
In effect, it created a small, independent company internally, with its innovative zeal and energy, while preserving the resources of a muchlarger enterprise.

 Firms that gain an advantage from risk taking do not do so by accident.
In fact, there are key elements that successful risk-taking organizations have in common.
First, they succeed in aligning the interests of their decision makers (managers) with the owners of the business (stockholders) so that firms expose themselves to the right risks and for the right reasons.
Second, they choose the right people for the task; some individuals respond to risk better than others.
Third, the reward and punishment21 Tellis, Gerard J.
and Golder, Peter N.
(2001).
Will and Vision: How Latecomers Grow to Dominatemechanisms in these firms are designed to punish bad risk taking and encourage good risk taking.
Finally, the culture of the organizations is conducive to sensible risk taking and it is structured accordingly.
In this section, we consider all four facets in detail.

 If there is a key to successful risk taking, it is to ensure that those who expose a business to risk or respond to risk make their decisions with a common purpose in mind – to increase the value of their businesses.
If the interests of the decision makers are not aligned with those of those who own the business, it is inevitable that the business will be exposed to some risks that it should be not be exposed to and not exposed to other risks that it should exploit.
In large publicly traded firms, this can be a difficult task.
The interests of top management can diverge from those of middle management and both may operate with objectives that deviate significantly from the stockholders in and the lenders to the corporation.In recent years, we have seen a spirited debate about corporate governance and

 why it is important for the future of business.
In particular, proponents of strong corporate governance argued that strengthening the oversight that stockholders and directors have over managers allows for change in badly managed firms and thus performs a social good.
There is also a risk-related dimension to this discussion of corporate governance.
At one end of the spectrum are firms where managers own little or no stake in the equity and make decisions to further their own interests.
In such firms, there will be too little risk taking because the decision makers get little of the upside from risk (because of their limited or non-existent equity stakes) and too much of the downside (they get fired if the risk does not pay off).
A comparison of stockholder controlled and management controlled banks found that stockholder controlled banks were more likely to take risk.22 In general, managers with limited equity stakes in firms not only invest more conservatively but are also more likely to borrow less and hold on to more cash.
At the other end of the spectrum are firms where the incumbent managers and key decisionMarkets.
New York: McGraw Hill.
22 Saunders, A., E.
Strock and N.G.
Travlos, 1990, Ownership Structure, Deregulation and Bank Risk Taking, Journal of Finance, v45, 643-654.makers have too much of their wealth tied up in the firm.
These insider-dominated firms, where managers are entrenched, tend take less risk than they should for three reasons:

 The link between corporate governance and risk taking is not only intuitive but is backed up by the evidence.
A study of 5452 firms across 38 countries looked at the link between risk taking and corporate governance by defining risk in terms of standard deviation in EBITDA over time, as a percent of total assets and relating this number to measures in corporate governance.23 Firms that have less insider control in markets where investors were better protected – i.e., high in corporate governance – tend to take more risk in operations.
These results are reinforced by studies of family run businesses (i.e.
publicly traded firms that are controlled and run by the founding families).
In a more direct test of how firms are affected by crisis, an examination of Korean firms in the aftermath of the 1997 Korean financial crisis found that firms with higher ownership concentration by foreign investors saw a smaller reduction in value than firms with concentrated insider and family ownership, suggesting that the latter responded to risk not as well as theformer.24Given that there is too little risk taking at either end of this ownership spectrum, the tricky part is to find the right balance.
Figure 11.5 illustrates the relationship between corporate ownership and risk taking:23 John, K.
L.
Litov and B.
Yeung, 2005, Corporate Governance and Managerial Risk Taking: Theory and Evidence, Working Paper.Figure 11.5: Corporate Governance and Risk TakingDecision makers (managers) have no equity investment in the firmDecision makers have significant equity investment in firm, but as part of diversified portfolioDecision makes (managers) have too much invested in equity of the firmToo little risk taking.
Managers behave like lenders and see little upside to risk taking.More balanced risk taking, with a consideration of the right types of risk., .
Managers will be risk averse since they fear losing a signficant part of their portfolios, if the risk does not pay off.
Too much of a focus on firm- specific risk.

 The appropriate corporate governance structure for the risk taking firm would therefore require decision makers to be invested in the equity of the firm but to be diversified at the same time, which is a tough balance to maintain since one often precludes the other.
The venture capital and private equity investors who provide equity for young, high growth firms are perhaps the closest that we get to this ideal.
They invest significant amounts in high-growth, high-risk businesses, but they spread their bets across multiple investments, thus generating diversification benefits.

 All the crisis management and risk analysis courses in the world cannot prepare one for the real event, and when confronted with it, some people panic, others freeze but a few thrive and become better decision makers.
Keeping a cool head while those around you are losing theirs is a unique skill that cannot be taught easily.
These are the individuals that you want making decisions during crises, and businesses that manage to hire and keep these people tend to weather risk better and gain advantages over their competitors.To understand the characteristics of a good crisis manager, it is perhaps best to consider why individuals often make bad decisions when faced with risk.
In a study of24 Baek, J., J.
Kang and K.S.
Park, 2004, Corporate Governance and Firm Value: Evidence from the Korean Financial Crisis, Working Paper.the phenomenon, Kahneman and Lovallo point to three shortcomings that lead to poordecisions in response to risk:25In summary, managers have trouble dealing with risk because the possibility of losses skews their decision making process, the inability to separate small risks from large risks and the failure to consider the aggregate effect of risky decisions.

 Good risk takers then have a combination of traits that seem mutually exclusive.
They are realists who still manage to be upbeat; they tend to be realistic in their assessments of success and failure but they are also confident in their capacity to deal with the consequences.
They allow for the possibility of losses but are not overwhelmed or scared by its prospects; in other words, they do not allow the possibility of losses to

 25 Kahneman, D.
and D.
Lovallo, 2006, Timid Choices and Bold Forecasts: A Cognitive Perspective on Risk Taking, Management Science, v39, 17-31.
26 For instance, an individual who accepts $ 20 a certainty equivalent for a 50% chance of winning $ 50 will accept close to $ 200 for a 50% chance of winning $ 500 and $2000 for a 50% chance of winning $

 skew their decision-making processes.
They are able to both keep their perspective and see the big picture even as they are immersed in the details of a crisis; in terms of decision making, they frame decisions widely and focus in on those details that have large consequences.
Finally, they can make decisions with limited and often incomplete information (which is par for the course in crisis) and make reasonable assumptions about the missing pieces.

 How can firms seek out and retain such individuals? First, the hiring process should be attuned to finding these crisis managers and include some measure of how individuals will react when faced with risky challenges.
Some investment banks, for instance, put interviewees to the test by forcing them to trade under simulated conditions and taking note of how they deal with market meltdowns.
Second, good risk takers are often not model employees in stable environments.
In fact, the very characteristics that make them good risk takers can make them troublemakers during other periods.
Third, it is difficult to hold on to good risk takers when the environment does not pose enough of a challenge for their skills; it is very likely that they will become bored and move on, if they are not challenged.
Finally, good risk takers tend to thrive when surrounded by kindred spirits; putting them in groups of more staid corporate citizens can drive themaway very quickly.27

 Once you have aligned the interests of decision makers with those of claimholders in the firm and hired good risk takers, the reward and punishment mechanism has to be calibrated to reward good risk taking behavior and punish bad risk taking behavior.
This is a lot harder than it looks because the essence of risk taking is that you lose some or even a significant amount of the time.
Consequently, any system that is purely results oriented will fail.
Thus, an investment bank that compensates its traders based on the profits and losses that they made on their trades for the firm may pay high bonuses to

 traders who were poor assessors of risk but were lucky during the period and penalize those traders who made reasoned bets on risk but lost.
While it may be difficult to put into practice, a good compensation system will therefore consider both processes and results.
In other words, a trader who is careful about keeping an inventory of risks taken and the rationale for taking these risks should be treated more favorably than one with chaotic trading strategies and little or no explanation for trading strategies used, even if the latter is more successful.these propositions about compensationinto practice can be

 complicated.
In the last three decades, firms in the United States have experimented with different types of compensation to improve risk taking and to counteract the fact that managers, left to their own devices, tend to be risk averse and reject good, risky investments.
In fact, managerial risk aversion has been offered as motivation for conglomerate mergers28 and excessive hedging against risk29.
Firms first added bonuses based upon profitability to fixed salaries to induce managers to take more upside risk, but discovered that higher profitability in a period is not always consistent with better risk taking or higher value for the firm.
Starting in the 1970s, firms shifted towards to equity- based compensation for managers, with stock grants in the company being the most common form.
There is mixed evidence on the question of whether equity-based compensation increases risk taking among managers.
While some of the earlier studies suggested that equity compensation may result in managers becoming over invested in firms and consequently more risk averse30, a more recent study of a change in Delaware takeover laws concludes that risk taking is lower when managers are not compensatedwith equity.31In the 1990s, the move towards equity compensation accelerated and shifted to equity options.
Since options increase in value, as volatility increases, there were some

 28 Amihud, Y., and B.
Lev, 1981, Risk reduction as a managerial motive for conglomerate mergers, Bell Journal of Economics 12, 605-617.
29 Smith, C.W., and R.M.
Stulz, 1985, The determinants of firms' hedging policies, Journal ofFinancial and Quantitative Analysis 20, 391-405.
30 Ross, S.
A., 2004.
Compensation, incentives, and the duality of risk aversion and riskiness.
Journal of Finance 59, 207-225.

 who worried that this would lead to too much risk taking, since it is conceivable that there are some risky actions that can make firms worse off while making options more valuable.
In fact, option-based compensation can have an impact on a number of different aspects of corporate finance including financing and dividend policy; managers who are compensated with options may be less likely to increase dividends or issue new stock since these actions can lower stock prices and thus the value of their options.32 The research on this topic is inconclusive, though.
In general, studies that link between risk taking and option based compensation have not been conclusive.
While some studies indicate no perceptible increase in risk taking, others do establish a link.33 A study of oil and gas producers finds that firms where managers are compensated with equity options are more likely to involved in risky exploration activity and less likely to hedge against oil price risk.34 An analysis of CEO behavior between 1992 and 1999 also finds that increased option grants are associated with higher volatility in stock prices in subsequent years, though the magnitude of the increase is modest.35 We would hasten to add that the increase in risk taking, by itself, is not bad news, since that is what equity compensation is designed to do.
However, there seems to be little evidence in these studies and others that the additional risk taking improves operating performance or leads to higher stockprices.36The debate currently is about the right mix of equity holdings and conventional compensation to offer decision makers to optimize risk taking.
If options encourage too

 31 Low, A., 2006, Managerial Risk-Taking Behavior and Equity-based Compensation, Working Paper, Ohio State University.
This paper concludes that firms where CEO compensation is not tied to equity returns tend to take about 10% less risk than firms where compensation is more equity based.
32 MacMinn, R.D.
and F.H.
Page, 2005, Stock Options and Capital Structure, Working Paper.
This study finds that option compensated managers are more likely to use debt than equity.
33 Carpenter, J.
N., 2000.
Does option compensation increase managerial risk appetite? Journal of Finance 55, 2311-2331.
34 Rajgopal, S.
and T.
Shevlin, 2001, Empirical Evidence on the Relation between Stock Option Compensation and Risk Taking, Working Paper, University of Washington.
35 Hanlon, M., S.
Rajgopal and T.
Shevlin, 2004, Large Sample Evidence on the Relation between Stock Option Compensation and Risk Taking, Working Paper.
University of Washington.
Similar conclusions are in Guay, W.
R.,1999, The Sensitivity of CEO Wealth to Equity Risk: An Analysis of the Magnitude and Determinants.
Journal of Financial Economics, 1999.
36 Cohen, R., B.J.
Hall and L.M.
Viceira, 2000, Do Executive Stock Options encourage Risk-taking? Working Paper, Harvard Business School.much risk taking and stock in the firm too little, is there a different compensation system that can encourage just the “right amount”? Figure 11.6 illustrates the balancing act:Figure 11.6: Compensation and Risk Taking

 As accounting rules on reporting employee option compensation are tightened, more firms are experimenting with restricted stock (with the restrictions applying on trading for periods after the grants) but it is unclear that this will provide a satisfactory solution.
After all, standard stock issues, restricted stock and options all share a common characteristic: they reward success but not failure; as we noted, good risk taking will frequently end in failure.
If the objective is to reward good risk taking behavior and punish bad behavior, no matter what the consequences, we are no closer to that objective now than we were three decades ago.

 Compensation systems represent one part of a larger story.
Organizations can encourage or discourage risk based upon how big they are, how they are structured and the culture within can also act as an incentive or an impediment to risk taking.
While at least one of these dimensions (size) may seem out of a firm’s control, there are ways in which it can come up with creative solutions.

 The relationship between the size of a firm and its risk taking capabilities has been widely debated and researched.
Earlier in the chapter, we noted the disadvantage faced by established companies when confronted with a disruptive technology; since they have too much invested in the status quo, they tend to react slowly to any challenge to that status quo.
At least, at first sight, smaller firms should be more likely to innovate and take risks than larger firms because they have less to lose and more to gain from shaking up established ways of doing business.
The evidence, though, suggests that the link

 between size and risk taking is more ambiguous.
A study of small and large airlines found that while small airlines were quicker and more likely to initiate competitive challenges (and thus support the “more risk taking” hypothesis), they were less responsive to competitive challenges from than larger airlines To summarize using sports terminology, small airlines were better at playing offense and large airlines at playing defense.37 Optimally, you would like to encourage the risk taking behavior of a small firm with the defensive capabilities of a large one.
The Apple experiment with ITunes, referred to earlier in the chapter, may be one way of doing this.To see the relevance of organizational structure, let us go back to two of the

 competitive edges that allow firms to succeed at risk taking: timely and reliable information and a speedy response.
While this may be a gross generalization, flatter organizations tend to be better than more hierarchical organizations in handing information and responding quickly.
It is revealing that investment banks, operating as they do in markets that are constantly exposed to risk, have flat organizational structures, where newly hired traders on the floor interact with managing directors.
In contract, commercial banks, operating in more staid business environments, cultivate multi-layered organizations where the employees at the lowest rungs can spend their entire careers in the bank without ever coming into contact with the bank’s managers.
A related issue is how much compartmentalization there is within the organization.
In organizations that have to deal with risk on a continuous basis, the lines between different functions and areas of the firm tend to be less firmly drawn, since dealing with risk will require them to collaborate and craft the appropriate response.
In contrast, organizations that don’t have to deal with crises very often tend to have more rigid separation between different partsof the business.

 It is also worth noting that the trend towards diversification among many companies in the sixties and seventies, which created conglomerates such as ITT, GE and Gulf Western, may have also worked against risk taking behavior.
In an admission that this component of corporate strategy had failed, Michael Porter attributed the decline in37 Chen, M.
and D.C.
Hambrick, 1995, Speed, Stealth and Selective Attack: How Small Firms Differ from Large Firms in Competitive Behavior, The Academcy of Management Journal, v38, 453-482.

 R&D spending to the presence of large, diversified corporations.38 A study of corporate R&D investments provided evidence that conglomerates were less willing to innovate and the reluctance was attributed to their use of internal capital markets (where funds from one part of the business are used to cover investment needs of other parts of the business) as opposed to external markets.39 This may at least partially explain why the US, with its abundance of young, technology companies has been able to lay claim to much of the growth in the sector over the last decade, whereas investments in technology have been slower in Europe where much of the investment has had to come from established corporations.

 The culture of a firm can also act as an engine for or as a brake on sensible risk taking.
Some firms are clearly much more open to risk taking and its consequences, positive as well as negative.
One key factor in risk taking is how the firm deals with failure rather than success; after all, risk takers are seldom punished for succeeding.
It was Thomas Watson who said that “the fastest way to succeed is to double your failure rate”.
Good risk taking organizations treat failure and success not as opposites but as complements since one cannot exist without the other.
While all of us would like to be successful in our endeavors, the irony is that the odds of success are improved as firms tolerate failure.
In a 2002 article in the Harvard Business Review, Farson and Keys argue that “failure-tolerant” leaders are an essential piece of successful risk organizations and note that they share these characteristics: taking38 Porter, M., 1992, Capital Disadvantage: America’s Failing Capital Investment System”, Harvard Business Review.
39 Seru, A., 2006, Do Conglomerates stifle innovation? Working Paper.

 In short, failure tolerant leaders engage their employees and use the result of risky experiments, positive and negative, to advantage.
If the flip side of risk aversion is irrational risk seeking, firms have to have pieces in place to prevent or at least operate as a check on ‘bad’ risk taking.
One is to have independent and objective assessments of risky proposals to ensure that project proponents don’t push biased analyses through.
A second is to encourage open debate, where managers are encouraged to challenge each other on assumptions and forecasts.
In summary, a willingness to accept the failures that are a natural outcome from taking risk and an openness to challenge proposals, even when they are presented by top management, characterize good risk taking organizations.

 The essence of risk management is not avoiding or eliminating risk but deciding which risks to exploit, which ones to let pass through to investors and which ones to avoid or hedge.
In this chapter, we focus on exploitable risks by first presenting evidence on the payoff to taking risk.
While there is evidence that higher risk taking, in the aggregate, leads to higher returns, there is also enough evidence to the contrary (i.e., that risk taking can be destructive) to suggest that firms should be careful about which risk they expose themselves to.

 To exploit risk, you need an edge over your competitors who are also exposed to that same risk, and there are five possible sources.
One is having more timely and reliable information when confronted with a crisis, allowing you to map out a superior plan of action in response.
A second is the speed of the response to the risk, since not all firms, even when provided with the same information, are equally effective at acting quickly and appropriately.
A third advantage may arise from experience weathering similar crises in the past.
The institutional memories as well as the individual experiences of how the crises unfolded may provide an advantage over competitors who are new to the risk.
A fourth advantage is grounded in resources, since firms with access to capital markets or large cash balances, superior technology and better trained personnel can survive risks better than their competitors.
Finally, firms that have more operating, production orfinancial flexibility built into their responses, as a result of choices made in earlier periods, will be able to adjust better than their more rigid compatriots.

 In the last part of the chapter, we examined how best to build a good risk-taking organization.
We began with a discussion of how well aligned the interests of decision makers are with interests of the owners of the firm; corporate governance can be a key part of good risk taking.
We considered the characteristics of effective risk takers and how firms can seek them out and keep them, and the compensation structures that best support risk taking.
Finally, we examined the effects of organizational structure and culture on encouraging and nurturing risk taking.

 If there is a theme that runs through this book, it is that risk underlies and affects every decision that a business makes, and that risk management is not just risk hedging.
In this chapter, we review what we know about risk in general and how best to deal with it in practice, and restate ten principles that should govern both risk assessment and risk management.

 Individuals and businesses have only three choices when it comes to dealing with risk.
The first is to denial: do not acknowledge that risk exists and hope it goes away.
In this idealized world, actions and consequences are logical and there are no unpleasant surprises.
The second is fear, take the opposite tack and allow the existence of risk to determine every aspect of behavior.
Cowering behind the protection of insurance and risk hedges, you hope to be spared of its worst manifestations.
Neither of these approaches puts you in any position to take advantage of risk.
But there is a third choice: accept the existence of risk, be realistic about both its odds and consequences, and map out the best way to deal with it.
This, in our view, is the pathway to making risk an ally rather than an adversary.

 One of the reasons the study of risk is fascinating is that the nature of risk has changed and continues to change over time, making old remedies dated and requiring constant reinvention.
In the last 20 years, there are three broad trends that have emerged in the shifting landscape of risk.that risk can and often does come from financial rather than product markets.

 As risks become more international, spread across sectors and encompass both financial and product markets, it should be no surprise that firms are finder fewer and fewer safe havens.
As little as 20 years ago, there were still firms that operated in relatively secure habitats, protected by governments or geography against competition.
They could predict their revenues and earnings with a fair degree of certainty and could make their other decisions on how much to borrow or pay in dividends accordingly.
In the United States, there were large sections of the economy that were insulated from risk; the regulated phone and power companies may not have had stellar growth but they did have solid earnings.
In Europe, protection from foreign competition allowed domestic companies in each country to preserve market share and profits even in the face of more efficientcompetitors overseas.

 There is one final point to be made about the ubiquity of risk.
In the last decade especially, it can be argued that the balance of power between businesses and consumers has shifted decisively in the consumer’s favor.
Armed with better information and more choices, consumers are getting better terms and, in the process, lowering profits and increasing risk for businesses.Risk Management 1 : Your biggest risks will come from places that you least expect them to come from and in forms that you least expected them to take.
The essence of good risk management is to be able to roll with the punches, when confronted with the unexpected.

 In chapter 2, we presented the Chinese symbol for risk as the combination of danger and opportunity.
Again and again, we have returned to this theme with a variety of examples.
Market volatility can ruin you or make you wealthy.
Changing customer tastes can lay your entire market to waste or allow you to dominate a market.
Business failures and large losses come from exposures to large risks but so do large profts and lasting successes.

 The trouble with risk management is that people see one side or the other of risk and respond accordingly.
Those who see the bad side of risk, i.e.
the danger side, either argue that it should be avoided or push for protection (through hedging and insurance) against it.
On the other side are those who see risk as upside and argue for more risk taking, not less.
Not surprisingly, their very different perspectives on risk will lead these groups to be on opposite sides of almost every debate, with the other side tarred as either “stuck in the mud” or “imprudent”.

 Risk is a combination of potential upside with significant downside and requires a more nuanced approach.
If we accept the proposition that we cannot have one (upside) without the other (downside), we can become more realistic about how we approach and deal with risk.
We can also move towards a consensus on which risks we should seek out, because the upside exceeds the downside, and which risks are imprudent, not because we do not like to take risk but because the downside exceeds the upside.
Risk Management 2: Risk is a mix of upside and downside.
Good risk management is not about seeking out or avoiding risk, but about maintaining the right balance between the two.

 In keeping with risk being a combination of danger and opportunity, we, as human beings, have decidedly mixed feelings about its existence.
On the one hand we fear it and its consequences while on the other we seek it out, hoping to share in the profits.
We see this in the behavior of both investors and businesses, as they seesaw wildly from taking too much risk in one period to too little in the next.

 While the traditional theory on risk has been built on the premise of the “risk averse” rational investor with a well-behaved preference function, studies of actual risk taking behavior suggest that our attitudes towards risk taking are more complicated.
To begin with, it is true that we are generally risk averse, but the degree of risk aversion varies widely across the population.
More troublingly, though, risk aversion seems to vary for the same individual, depending upon how choices are framed and the circumstances of the choice.
For instance, an individual who is normally risk averse can become risk seeking when given a chance to make back money lost on a prior gamble.
In fact, behavioral economics and finance have developed as disciplines largely on the basis of findings such as these that suggest that our behavior when confronted with risk is not always rational, at least as defined in classical economics, and often predictable.Risk Management 3: Managing risk is a human endeavor and a risk management systemis only as good as the people manning it.

 Risk comes from different sources, takes different forms and has different consequences but not all risk is created equal when it comes to how it affects value and it should be managed.
To provide one very concrete example, most conventional risk and return models draw a line between risks that affect one or a few firms and are thus diversifiable and risks that affect many or all firms and are not diversifiable.
Only the latter risk is rewarded in these models, on the assumption that investors in firms are diversified and can mitigate their exposure to the former.In fact, there are a number of other dimensions on which we can categorize risk with implications for risk management.derivatives, futures or insurance).

 be argued that discontinuous risk is both more damaging and more difficult to hedge.
Earlier in the book, we suggested that a risk inventory, where we listed all potential risks facing a firm, was a good beginning to the risk management process.
Breaking the risks down into its components – firm specific or market, small or large, symmetric or asymmetric (and if so in what way), continuous versus discontinuous and short term or long term – will make the risk inventory a more useful tool in risk management.

 Finally, the saying that risk is in the eye of the beholder does have a foundation.
After all, we can look at the risk in an investment through the eyes of the immediate decision makers (the line managers), their superiors (the top managers) or investors in that firm (who are often mutual funds or pension funds).
As a generalization, risks that seems huge to middle managers may not seem as large to top managers, who bring a portfolio perspective to the process, and be inconsequential to investors in the firm, who have the luxury of having diversification work its wonders for them.Risk Management 4: To manage risk right, you have to pick the right perspective on risk and stay consistent through the process to that perspective.
In other words, if you choose to view risk through the eyes of investors in the firm, you will assess and behave accordingly.

 There is a widespread belief even among risk managers that some risks are too qualitative to be assessed.
This notion that some risks cannot be evaluated, either because the likelihood of occurrence is very small or the consequences too unpredictable can be dangerous, since these are exactly the types of risks that have the potential to create damage.
As we have argued through this book, the debate should be about what tools to use to assess risk rather than whether they can be assessed.
At the risk of sounding dogmatic, all risks can and should be assessed, though the ease and method of assessment can vary across risks.

 There are two keys to good risk assessment.
The first is better quality and more timely information about the risks as they evolve, so that the element of surprise is reduced.
The second is tools such as risk-adjusted discount rates, simulations, scenario analysis and VaR to convert the raw data into risk measures.
On both, it can be argued that we are better off than we were in earlier generations.
There is more information available to decision makers, with a larger portion of it being provided in real time.
The tools available have also become more accessible and sophisticated, with technology lending a helping hand.
Thus, a Monte Carlo simulation that would have been required the services of a mainframe computer and been prohibitively costly thirty years ago can be run on a personal computer with a very modest outlay.The advances in risk assessment should not lead to false complacency or to the

 conclusion that risk management has become easier as a consequence for three reasons.
First, as we noted earlier in this chapter, the risks being assessed are also becoming more global and complex and it is an interesting question as to whether the improvements in information and assessment are keeping up with the evolution of risk.
Second, risk management is still a relative game.
In other words, it is not just how well a business or investor assesses risk that matters, but how well it does it relative to the competition.
The democratization of information and tools has leveled the playing field and made it possible for small firms to take on much larger and more resource-rich competitors.
Third, as both the data and the tools become more plentiful, picking the right tool to assess a risk (and it can be different for different risks) has become a more critical component of success at risk management.Risk Management 5: To pick the right tool to assess risk, you have to understand what the tools share in common, what they do differently and how to use the output from each tool.

 Superior information and the best tools for risk assessment add up to little, if they do not lead to better decisions when faced with risk.
In many businesses, those who assess risk are not necessarily those who make decisions (often based on those risk assessments) and this separation can lead to trouble.
In particular, risk assessment tools are often not tailored to the needs of decision makers and are often misread or misused as a consequence.

 The problems have their roots in why we assess risk in the first place.
There are some who believe that assessing risk is equivalent to eliminating it and thus feel more secure with an analysis that is backed up by a detailed and sophisticated risk assessment.
There are others who use risk assessments, not to make better decisions, but as cover, if things do not work out as anticipated.
Still others think that risk assessment will make them more comfortable, when they have to make their final judgments.
The reality is that risk assessment makes us aware of risk but does not eliminate it, and cannot be used as an excuse for poor decisions.
Finally, the irony of good risk assessment is that it mayactually make you more uncomfortable as a decision maker rather than less; more information can often lead to more uncertainty rather than less.For risk assessments to lead to better decisions, there are three things that we need to do better:

 (1) If risk is assessed and decisions are made are by different entities, each one has to be aware of the other’s requirements and preferences.
Thus, risk assessors have to understand what decision makers see as the major issues, and tailor both the tools chosen and the output to these needs and constraints.
At the same time, those who make decisions have to recognize the flaws and limitations of the information used by risk assessors and understand at least the broad contours of the tools being used to assess risk.
(2) The risk assessment tools have to be built around the risks that matter rather than all risks.
As we noted in an earlier section, we are faced with dozens of risks, of different types and with different consequences and some of these risks matter far more than others.
Keeping risk assessment focused on that which matters will make it more useful to decision makers; a shorter, more focused risk assessment is more useful than one thatis comprehensive but rambling.

 (3) Risk assessment should not become an exercise in testing out only the downside or the bad side of risk, even though that may be what worries decision makers the most.
A good risk assessment will hold true to the complete measure of risk and provide a picture of both upside potential and downside risk.

 In short, for risk assessment to work, decision makers need to both understand and be involved in the risk assessment process, and risk assessors should not be shut out of the decision making process.
The fact that the former tend to be higher in the management hierarchy can make this a difficult task.Risk Management 6: The tools to assess risk and the output from risk assessment should be tailored to the decision-making process, rather than the other way around.Investors and businesses face a myriad of risks and it is easy to be overwhelmed.
The theme of the last three chapters is that at good risk management is that some of this

 risk should be passed through to investors, that some of it should be hedged and insured and that some should be actively sought out and used as a source of competitive advantage.
Firms that are good at apportioning the risks they face to the right boxes have much better odds of succeeding.The underlying fundamentals for making these choices are not complicated.
You

 begin with the judgment on which risk or risks you want to exploit because you believe you have a advantage – better information, speedier response, more flexibility or better resources – over your competition.
Looking at the risks you choose not to exploit, you have to weigh the costs of protecting yourself against a risk against the potential benefits from the protection – tax benefits, lower distress costs and a more rational decision making process.
There are some risks that you may be able to reduce or eliminate through the normal course of your operations and thus are costless to hedge, but there are other risks that are costly to hedge.
For these risks, the choice becomes complicated especially for publicly traded companies, since they have to compare the costs that they, as companies, would face to the costs that investors in their companies would face to eliminate the same risks.
It is this comparison that would lead us to conclude that publicly traded firms are usually better off passing through a significant portion of their firm- specific risk and even exchange rate risk to their investors, rather than incur costs to hedge them.
There are some risks, though, where the company is in a better position than its investors in assessing and hedging the risks.
For instance, Boeing has much more information about its exchange rate risk exposure on individual contracts with foreign airlines than its investors, and be able to hedge those risks more efficiently.Risk Management 7: Hedging risk is but a small part of risk management.
Determining which risks should be hedged, which should not and which should be taken advantage is the key to successful risk management.

 Risk managers are measured and judged on a number of different dimensions, but the only dimension that matters is how it impacts the value of the business.
Good risk management increases value, whereas bad risk management destroys value.
Choosing any other measure or objective can only distort the process.
Consider a few alternatives.

 If the success of risk management is measured by how much risk it eliminates from the process, the logical end product is that too little risk will be exploited and too much hedged.
That is why firms that focus on reducing earnings or stock price volatility or the deviation from analyst forecasts will end up mismanaging risk.
What about a higher stock price? It is true that in an efficient market, stock price and the value of equity move hand in hand, but there are two problems with a stock-price focus.
The first is that in an inefficient market, where investors may focus on the short term or on the wrong variables (earnings variability, for instance) there may be a positive market response to poor risk management decisions.
That response will fade over time, but the managers who made the decisions would have been rewarded and have moved on (or up) by then.
The second is that the value of a business includes the value of its equity and other claimholders in the firm (lenders, in particular).
Decisions relating to risk often alter the balance between debt and equity, and can sometimes make stockholders better off at the expense of lenders.
Hence, the focus should be on the value of the business in its entirety rather thanjust the equity investors.

 So, how do we link risk management to value? To begin with, we need much richer valuation models than the ones in use that tend to put all of the focus (at least when it comes to risk) on the discount rate.
All of the inputs in a conventional vauaiton model, as we explained in chapter 9, from cash flows to growth rates to the length of the growth period should be a function of how well risk is managed in the firm.
Only then can we see the full impact on value of increasing exposure to some risks and the consequences of hedging or passing through others.
Given that most analysts value firms using earnings multiples and comparables, we need to also consider ways in which we can incorporate the full effects of risk management into these comparisons as well.
Finally, it is worth exploring, as in chapter 8, how the tools in the real option tool kit can be used to capture the upside potential for risk.Risk Management 8: To manage risk right, you have to understand the levers that determine the value of a business.

 For decades, risk management was viewed as a finance function, with the CFO playing the role of risk measurer, assessor and punisher (for those who crossed defined risk limits).
In keeping with this definition, risk management become focused entirely on risk assessment and risk hedging.
The elevation of strategic risk management or enterprise risk management in businesses, with its willingness to consider the upside of risk, has come with one unfortunate side cost.
Many firms have a person or group in charge of risk management, given primary responsibility for coordinating and managing risk through the organization.
While we applaud the recognition given to risk management, it has also led others in the firm, especially in the other functional areas, to think that the existence of a risk management group has relieved them of the responsibility of having to play a role in managing risk.

 While there are some aspects of risk management – risk assessment mechanics and hedging – that may be finance-related and thus logically embedded in treasury departments, there are many aspects of risk management, especially risk taking, that cut across functional areas.
Taking advantage of shifts in customer tastes for a retailer requires the skills of the marketing and advertising departments.
Exploiting technological change to revamp production facilities is not something that the treasury department can do much about but is more the domain of the operations department.
In short, every decision made by a firm in any functional area has a risk management component.
While we need a centralized group to aggregate these risks and look at the portfolio, individual decision makers have to be aware of how their decisions play out in the big picture.
Risk Management 9: Managing risk well is the essence of good business practice and si everyone’s responsibility.

 As we have noted through this chapter and, in fact, all through the book, a lot of moving pieces have to work together consistently for risk management to succeed.
The challenge is greater if the success has to be repeated period after period.
Not surprisingly, firms that succeed at risk management plan for and are organize to deliver that success.In chapter 11, we laid out some of the ingredients of the consistently successful risk taking organization:analysts and decision makers.Risk Management 10: To succeed at risk management, you have to embed it in the organization through its structure and culture and get the right people.

 As the interconnections between economies and sectors has increased and become more complex, firms have become more exposed to risk and the need to manage this risk has increased concurrently.
While this increasing exposure to change has put firms at risk, it has also opened up new frontiers that they can exploit to profit.
Risk is after all a combination of threat and opportunity.

 Risk management as a discipline, has evolved unevenly across different functional areas.
In finance, the preoccupation has been with the effect of risk on discount rates and little attention has been paid to the potential upside of risk until recently; real options represent the first real attempt to bring in the potential profits of being exposed to risk.
In strategy, risk management has been a side story to the main focus on competitive advantages and barriers to entry.
In practice, risk management at most organizations is splintered, with little communication between those who assess risk and those who make decisions based upon those risk assessments.

 This book is an attempt to bridge the chasm not only between different functional areas = finance, strategy and operations – but also between different parts of organizations where the responsibility for risk management lie today.
In the process, it makes the argument that good risk management lies at the heart of successful businesses everywhere.

 